Two dozen federal agencies flagged the biggest dangers posed by a warming planet. The list spreads across American society.

WASHINGTON -- Less food. More traffic accidents. Extreme weather hitting nuclear waste sites. Migrants rushing toward the United States, fleeing even worse calamity in their own countries.

Those scenarios, once the stuff of dystopian fiction, are now driving American policymaking. Under orders from President Biden, top officials at every government agency have spent months considering the top climate threats their agencies face, and how to cope with them.

On Thursday, the White House offered a first look at the results, releasing the climate-adaptation plans of 23 agencies, including the departments of Energy, Defense, Agriculture, Homeland Security, Transportation and Commerce. The plans reveal the dangers posed by a warming planet to every aspect of American life, and the difficulty of coping with those threats.

The federal government has attempted this exercise before, during the Obama administration. That work effectively stopped under former President Donald J. Trump, whose disdain for climate science led most agencies to either shelve their planning for climate change or stop talking about it.

Within weeks of taking office, President Biden directed officials to quickly resume the work. Stressing the urgency of the threat, the president gave agencies four months to come up with plans that listed their main vulnerabilities to climate change and strategies to address them.

''Nearly every service that the government provides will be impacted by climate change sooner or later,'' said Jesse Keenan, a professor at Tulane University who focuses on climate adaptation and has advised federal agencies.

The plans released Thursday are brief, many of them fewer than 30 pages. They include core themes: ensuring that new facilities meet tougher construction standards, using less energy and water at existing buildings, better protecting workers against extreme heat, educating staff about climate science, and creating supply chains that are less likely to be disrupted by storms or other shocks.

The documents also reflect Mr. Biden's emphasis on racial equity, looking at the effects of climate change on minority and low-income communities and how agencies can address them. For example, the Department of Health and Human Services said it will focus research grants on the health effects on those communities.

But the most revealing information in the newly released plans could be their description, sometimes in frank terms, of the dangers that climate change holds.

Agriculture

The Department of Agriculture lists the ways climate change threatens America's food supply: Changes in temperature and precipitation patterns, more pests and disease, reduced soil quality, fewer pollinating insects and more storms and wildfires will combine to reduce crops and livestock.

To address those challenges, the department calls for more research into climate threats, and better communication of those findings to farmers.

The plan is also candid about the limits of what can be done. In response to drought, for example, farmers can build new irrigation systems, and governments can build new dams. But irrigation is expensive, the department notes, and dams affect the ecosystems around them.

Transportation

Climate change also threatens Americans' ability to move within and between cities, restricting not just mobility but the transportation of goods that drive the economy. In a list of potential effects from climate change, the Department of Transportation notes that rising temperatures will make it more expensive to build and maintain roads and bridges.

And the experience of getting around will become slower and more frustrating. As hotter days cause asphalt to degrade, congestion will increase as traffic slows. Severe weather events will ''require flight cancellations, sometimes for extended periods of time,'' and more heat will force planes to fly shorter distances and carry less weight.

Some of the effects the transportation department anticipates are dangerous. They include ''more frequent/severe flooding of underground tunnels'' and ''increased risk of vehicle crashes in severe weather.''

Even the quality of driving could get worse. The plan warns of ''decreased driver/operator performance and decision-making skills, due to driver fatigue as a result of adverse weather.''

Energy

Sometimes, the plans demonstrate how much work remains. The Department of Energy, for example, said it has assessed the climate risks for just half of its sites, which range from advanced research laboratories to storage facilities for radioactive waste from the nuclear weapons program.

''DOE's nuclear security mission is critical to national security and is also largely conducted at DOE sites that are vulnerable to extreme weather conditions,'' the department's plan says. ''DOE's environmental mission could also experience disruptions if facilities dedicated to radioactive waste processing and disposal are impacted by climate hazards.''

The department says it's able to address that threat, but doesn't go into specifics. ''DOE has a well-established hazard assessment and adaptation process focused on its high-hazard nuclear facilities. This process ensures that the most critical facilities are well protected from climate risks,'' the plan states.

Homeland Security

For the Department of Homeland Security, climate change means the risk of large numbers of climate refugees -- people reaching the U.S. border, pushed out of their countries by a mix of long-term challenges like drought or sudden shocks like a tsunami.

''Climate change is likely to increase population movements from Mexico, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean,'' the department's plan reads. The department is trying to develop ''a responsive and coordinated operational plan for mass migration events,'' it said.

The plan comes just weeks after President Biden condemned Border Patrol officers on horseback for their treatment of Haitian migrants crossing the border into Texas. The administration then faced criticism for sending many of those migrants back to Haiti, which is still struggling from just the sort of environmental challenges described in the plan.

The department doesn't say how it plans to respond in the future as more people flee to the United States, beyond saying it ''will focus on national security and balanced, equitable outcomes.''

Defense

Climate change will lead to new sources of conflict, and also make it harder for the military to operate, the Department of Defense wrote in its climate plan.

Water shortages could even become a new source of tension between the U.S. military overseas and the countries where troops are based. At DOD sites outside the United States, ''military water requirements might compete with local water needs, creating potential areas of friction or even conflict.''

But learning to operate during extreme weather should also be viewed as a new type of weapon, the plan says, one that can help the United States prevail over enemies. ''This enables U.S. forces to gain distinct advantages over potential adversaries,'' the plan reads, ''if our forces can operate in conditions where others must take shelter or go to ground.''

Commerce

Not all of the climate threats facing the federal government are insurmountable.

The Department of Commerce, which runs the U.S. Patent and Trade Office, said that as the effects of climate change become more severe, it expects a surge in applications for patents for ''climate change adaptation-related technologies.'' Such a surge ''would impact the department's ability to process such applications in a timely manner, having a direct impact on U.S. competitiveness and economic growth.''

For that challenge, at least, there is a solution. For inventions that promise to help with environmental challenges, the department said, patent applications may be able to jump ahead in line -- or, as the plan phrased it, ''advanced out of turn for examination when a petition is filed.''

The science of climate change is more solid and widely agreed upon than you might think. But the scope of the topic, as well as rampant disinformation, can make it hard to separate fact from fiction. Here, we’ve done our best to present you with not only the most accurate scientific information, but also an explanation of how we know it.

How do we know climate change is really happening?

Climate change is often cast as a prediction made by complicated computer models. But the scientific basis for climate change is much broader, and models are actually only one part of it (and, for what it’s worth, they’re surprisingly accurate).

For more than a century, scientists have understood the basic physics behind why greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide cause warming. These gases make up just a small fraction of the atmosphere but exert outsized control on Earth’s climate by trapping some of the planet’s heat before it escapes into space. This greenhouse effect is important: It’s why a planet so far from the sun has liquid water and life!

However, during the Industrial Revolution, people started burning coal and other fossil fuels to power factories, smelters and steam engines, which added more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. Ever since, human activities have been heating the planet.

We know this is true thanks to an overwhelming body of evidence that begins with temperature measurements taken at weather stations and on ships starting in the mid-1800s. Later, scientists began tracking surface temperatures with satellites and looking for clues about climate change in geologic records. Together, these data all tell the same story: Earth is getting hotter.

Average global temperatures have increased by 2.2 degrees Fahrenheit, or 1.2 degrees Celsius, since 1880, with the greatest changes happening in the late 20th century. Land areas have warmed more than the sea surface and the Arctic has warmed the most — by more than 4 degrees Fahrenheit just since the 1960s. Temperature extremes have also shifted. In the United States, daily record highs now outnumber record lows two-to-one.

This warming is unprecedented in recent geologic history. A famous illustration, first published in 1998 and often called the hockey-stick graph, shows how temperatures remained fairly flat for centuries (the shaft of the stick) before turning sharply upward (the blade). It’s based on data from tree rings, ice cores and other natural indicators. And the basic picture, which has withstood decades of scrutiny from climate scientists and contrarians alike, shows that Earth is hotter today than it’s been in at least 1,000 years, and probably much longer.

In fact, surface temperatures actually mask the true scale of climate change, because the ocean has absorbed 90 percent of the heat trapped by greenhouse gases. Measurements collected over the last six decades by oceanographic expeditions and networks of floating instruments show that every layer of the ocean is warming up. According to one study, the ocean has absorbed as much heat between 1997 and 2015 as it did in the previous 130 years.

We also know that climate change is happening because we see the effects everywhere. Ice sheets and glaciers are shrinking while sea levels are rising. Arctic sea ice is disappearing. In the spring, snow melts sooner and plants flower earlier. Animals are moving to higher elevations and latitudes to find cooler conditions. And droughts, floods and wildfires have all gotten more extreme. Models predicted many of these changes, but observations show they are now coming to pass.

Back to top.

How much agreement is there among scientists about climate change?

There’s no denying that scientists love a good, old-fashioned argument. But when it comes to climate change, there is virtually no debate: Numerous studies have found that more than 90 percent of scientists who study Earth’s climate agree that the planet is warming and that humans are the primary cause. Most major scientific bodies, from NASA to the World Meteorological Organization, endorse this view. That’s an astounding level of consensus given the contrarian, competitive nature of the scientific enterprise, where questions like what killed the dinosaurs remain bitterly contested.

Scientific agreement about climate change started to emerge in the late 1980s, when the influence of human-caused warming began to rise above natural climate variability. By 1991, two-thirds of earth and atmospheric scientists surveyed for an early consensus study said that they accepted the idea of anthropogenic global warming. And by 1995, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a famously conservative body that periodically takes stock of the state of scientific knowledge, concluded that “the balance of evidence suggests that there is a discernible human influence on global climate.” Currently, more than 97 percent of publishing climate scientists agree on the existence and cause of climate change (as does nearly 60 percent of the general population of the United States).

So where did we get the idea that there’s still debate about climate change? A lot of it came from coordinated messaging campaigns by companies and politicians that opposed climate action. Many pushed the narrative that scientists still hadn’t made up their minds about climate change, even though that was misleading. Frank Luntz, a Republican consultant, explained the rationale in an infamous 2002 memo to conservative lawmakers: “Should the public come to believe that the scientific issues are settled, their views about global warming will change accordingly,” he wrote. Questioning consensus remains a common talking point today, and the 97 percent figure has become something of a lightning rod.

To bolster the falsehood of lingering scientific doubt, some people have pointed to things like the Global Warming Petition Project, which urged the United States government to reject the Kyoto Protocol of 1997, an early international climate agreement. The petition proclaimed that climate change wasn’t happening, and even if it were, it wouldn’t be bad for humanity. Since 1998, more than 30,000 people with science degrees have signed it. However, nearly 90 percent of them studied something other than Earth, atmospheric or environmental science, and the signatories included just 39 climatologists. Most were engineers, doctors, and others whose training had little to do with the physics of the climate system.

A few well-known researchers remain opposed to the scientific consensus. Some, like Willie Soon, a researcher affiliated with the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, have ties to the fossil fuel industry. Others do not, but their assertions have not held up under the weight of evidence. At least one prominent skeptic, the physicist Richard Muller, changed his mind after reassessing historical temperature data as part of the Berkeley Earth project. His team’s findings essentially confirmed the results he had set out to investigate, and he came away firmly convinced that human activities were warming the planet. “Call me a converted skeptic,” he wrote in an Op-Ed for the Times in 2012.

Mr. Luntz, the Republican pollster, has also reversed his position on climate change and now advises politicians on how to motivate climate action.

A final note on uncertainty: Denialists often use it as evidence that climate science isn’t settled. However, in science, uncertainty doesn’t imply a lack of knowledge. Rather, it’s a measure of how well something is known. In the case of climate change, scientists have found a range of possible future changes in temperature, precipitation and other important variables — which will depend largely on how quickly we reduce emissions. But uncertainty does not undermine their confidence that climate change is real and that people are causing it.

Back to top.

Do we really only have 150 years of climate data? How is that enough to tell us about centuries of change?

Earth’s climate is inherently variable. Some years are hot and others are cold, some decades bring more hurricanes than others, some ancient droughts spanned the better part of centuries. Glacial cycles operate over many millenniums. So how can scientists look at data collected over a relatively short period of time and conclude that humans are warming the planet? The answer is that the instrumental temperature data that we have tells us a lot, but it’s not all we have to go on.

Historical records stretch back to the 1880s (and often before), when people began to regularly measure temperatures at weather stations and on ships as they traversed the world’s oceans. These data show a clear warming trend during the 20th century.

Some have questioned whether these records could be skewed, for instance, by the fact that a disproportionate number of weather stations are near cities, which tend to be hotter than surrounding areas as a result of the so-called urban heat island effect. However, researchers regularly correct for these potential biases when reconstructing global temperatures. In addition, warming is corroborated by independent data like satellite observations, which cover the whole planet, and other ways of measuring temperature changes.

Much has also been made of the small dips and pauses that punctuate the rising temperature trend of the last 150 years. But these are just the result of natural climate variability or other human activities that temporarily counteract greenhouse warming. For instance, in the mid-1900s, internal climate dynamics and light-blocking pollution from coal-fired power plants halted global warming for a few decades. (Eventually, rising greenhouse gases and pollution-control laws caused the planet to start heating up again.) Likewise, the so-called warming hiatus of the 2000s was partly a result of natural climate variability that allowed more heat to enter the ocean rather than warm the atmosphere. The years since have been the hottest on record.

Still, could the entire 20th century just be one big natural climate wiggle? To address that question, we can look at other kinds of data that give a longer perspective. Researchers have used geologic records like tree rings, ice cores, corals and sediments that preserve information about prehistoric climates to extend the climate record. The resulting picture of global temperature change is basically flat for centuries, then turns sharply upward over the last 150 years. It has been a target of climate denialists for decades. However, study after study has confirmed the results, which show that the planet hasn’t been this hot in at least 1,000 years, and probably longer.

Back to top.

How do we know climate change is caused by humans?

Scientists have studied past climate changes to understand the factors that can cause the planet to warm or cool. The big ones are changes in solar energy, ocean circulation, volcanic activity and the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. And they have each played a role at times.

For example, 300 years ago, a combination of reduced solar output and increased volcanic activity cooled parts of the planet enough that Londoners regularly ice skated on the Thames. About 12,000 years ago, major changes in Atlantic circulation plunged the Northern Hemisphere into a frigid state. And 56 million years ago, a giant burst of greenhouse gases, from volcanic activity or vast deposits of methane (or both), abruptly warmed the planet by at least 9 degrees Fahrenheit, scrambling the climate, choking the oceans and triggering mass extinctions.

In trying to determine the cause of current climate changes, scientists have looked at all of these factors. The first three have varied a bit over the last few centuries and they have quite likely had modest effects on climate, particularly before 1950. But they cannot account for the planet’s rapidly rising temperature, especially in the second half of the 20th century, when solar output actually declined and volcanic eruptions exerted a cooling effect.

That warming is best explained by rising greenhouse gas concentrations. Greenhouse gases have a powerful effect on climate (see the next question for why). And since the Industrial Revolution, humans have been adding more of them to the atmosphere, primarily by extracting and burning fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas, which releases carbon dioxide.

Bubbles of ancient air trapped in ice show that, before about 1750, the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was roughly 280 parts per million. It began to rise slowly and crossed the 300 p.p.m. threshold around 1900. CO2 levels then accelerated as cars and electricity became big parts of modern life, recently topping 420 p.p.m. The concentration of methane, the second most important greenhouse gas, has more than doubled. We’re now emitting carbon much faster than it was released 56 million years ago.

These rapid increases in greenhouse gases have caused the climate to warm abruptly. In fact, climate models suggest that greenhouse warming can explain virtually all of the temperature change since 1950. According to the most recent report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which assesses published scientific literature, natural drivers and internal climate variability can only explain a small fraction of late-20th century warming.

Another study put it this way: The odds of current warming occurring without anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions are less than 1 in 100,000.

But greenhouse gases aren’t the only climate-altering compounds people put into the air. Burning fossil fuels also produces particulate pollution that reflects sunlight and cools the planet. Scientists estimate that this pollution has masked up to half of the greenhouse warming we would have otherwise experienced.

Back to top.

Since greenhouse gases occur naturally, how do we know they’re causing Earth’s temperature to rise?

Greenhouse gases like water vapor and carbon dioxide serve an important role in the climate. Without them, Earth would be far too cold to maintain liquid water and humans would not exist!

Here’s how it works: the planet’s temperature is basically a function of the energy the Earth absorbs from the sun (which heats it up) and the energy Earth emits to space as infrared radiation (which cools it down). Because of their molecular structure, greenhouse gases temporarily absorb some of that outgoing infrared radiation and then re-emit it in all directions, sending some of that energy back toward the surface and heating the planet. Scientists have understood this process since the 1850s.

Greenhouse gas concentrations have varied naturally in the past. Over millions of years, atmospheric CO2 levels have changed depending on how much of the gas volcanoes belched into the air and how much got removed through geologic processes. On time scales of hundreds to thousands of years, concentrations have changed as carbon has cycled between the ocean, soil and air.

Today, however, we are the ones causing CO2 levels to increase at an unprecedented pace by taking ancient carbon from geologic deposits of fossil fuels and putting it into the atmosphere when we burn them. Since 1750, carbon dioxide concentrations have increased by almost 50 percent. Methane and nitrous oxide, other important anthropogenic greenhouse gases that are released mainly by agricultural activities, have also spiked over the last 250 years.

We know based on the physics described above that this should cause the climate to warm. We also see certain telltale “fingerprints” of greenhouse warming. For example, nights are warming even faster than days because greenhouse gases don’t go away when the sun sets. And upper layers of the atmosphere have actually cooled, because more energy is being trapped by greenhouse gases in the lower atmosphere.

We also know that we are the cause of rising greenhouse gas concentrations — and not just because we can measure the CO2 coming out of tailpipes and smokestacks. We can see it in the chemical signature of the carbon in CO2.

Carbon comes in three different masses: 12, 13 and 14. Things made of organic matter (including fossil fuels) tend to have relatively less carbon-13. Volcanoes tend to produce CO2 with relatively more carbon-13. And over the last century, the carbon in atmospheric CO2 has gotten lighter, pointing to an organic source.

We can tell it’s old organic matter by looking for carbon-14, which is radioactive and decays over time. Fossil fuels are too ancient to have any carbon-14 left in them, so if they were behind rising CO2 levels, you would expect the amount of carbon-14 in the atmosphere to drop, which is exactly what the data show.

It’s important to note that water vapor is the most abundant greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. However, it does not cause warming; instead it responds to it. That’s because warmer air holds more moisture, which creates a snowball effect in which human-caused warming allows the atmosphere to hold more water vapor and further amplifies climate change. This so-called feedback cycle has doubled the warming caused by anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions.

Back to top.

Why should we be worried that the planet has warmed 2°F since the 1800s?

A common source of confusion when it comes to climate change is the difference between weather and climate. Weather is the constantly changing set of meteorological conditions that we experience when we step outside, whereas climate is the long-term average of those conditions, usually calculated over a 30-year period. Or, as some say: Weather is your mood and climate is your personality.

So while 2 degrees Fahrenheit doesn’t represent a big change in the weather, it’s a huge change in climate. As we’ve already seen, it’s enough to melt ice and raise sea levels, to shift rainfall patterns around the world and to reorganize ecosystems, sending animals scurrying toward cooler habitats and killing trees by the millions.

It’s also important to remember that two degrees represents the global average, and many parts of the world have already warmed by more than that. For example, land areas have warmed about twice as much as the sea surface. And the Arctic has warmed by about 5 degrees. That’s because the loss of snow and ice at high latitudes allows the ground to absorb more energy, causing additional heating on top of greenhouse warming.

Relatively small long-term changes in climate averages also shift extremes in significant ways. For instance, heat waves have always happened, but they have shattered records in recent years. In June of 2020, a town in Siberia registered temperatures of 100 degrees. And in Australia, meteorologists have added a new color to their weather maps to show areas where temperatures exceed 125 degrees. Rising sea levels have also increased the risk of flooding because of storm surges and high tides. These are the foreshocks of climate change.

And we are in for more changes in the future — up to 9 degrees Fahrenheit of average global warming by the end of the century, in the worst-case scenario. For reference, the difference in global average temperatures between now and the peak of the last ice age, when ice sheets covered large parts of North America and Europe, is about 11 degrees Fahrenheit.

Under the Paris Climate Agreement, which President Biden recently rejoined, countries have agreed to try to limit total warming to between 1.5 and 2 degrees Celsius, or 2.7 and 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, since preindustrial times. And even this narrow range has huge implications. According to scientific studies, the difference between 2.7 and 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit will very likely mean the difference between coral reefs hanging on or going extinct, and between summer sea ice persisting in the Arctic or disappearing completely. It will also determine how many millions of people suffer from water scarcity and crop failures, and how many are driven from their homes by rising seas. In other words, one degree Fahrenheit makes a world of difference.

Back to top.

Is climate change a part of the planet’s natural warming and cooling cycles?

Earth’s climate has always changed. Hundreds of millions of years ago, the entire planet froze. Fifty million years ago, alligators lived in what we now call the Arctic. And for the last 2.6 million years, the planet has cycled between ice ages when the planet was up to 11 degrees cooler and ice sheets covered much of North America and Europe, and milder interglacial periods like the one we’re in now.

Climate denialists often point to these natural climate changes as a way to cast doubt on the idea that humans are causing climate to change today. However, that argument rests on a logical fallacy. It’s like “seeing a murdered body and concluding that people have died of natural causes in the past, so the murder victim must also have died of natural causes,” a team of social scientists wrote in The Debunking Handbook, which explains the misinformation strategies behind many climate myths.

Indeed, we know that different mechanisms caused the climate to change in the past. Glacial cycles, for example, were triggered by periodic variations in Earth’s orbit, which take place over tens of thousands of years and change how solar energy gets distributed around the globe and across the seasons.

These orbital variations don’t affect the planet’s temperature much on their own. But they set off a cascade of other changes in the climate system; for instance, growing or melting vast Northern Hemisphere ice sheets and altering ocean circulation. These changes, in turn, affect climate by altering the amount of snow and ice, which reflect sunlight, and by changing greenhouse gas concentrations. This is actually part of how we know that greenhouse gases have the ability to significantly affect Earth’s temperature.

For at least the last 800,000 years, atmospheric CO2 concentrations oscillated between about 180 parts per million during ice ages and about 280 p.p.m. during warmer periods, as carbon moved between oceans, forests, soils and the atmosphere. These changes occurred in lock step with global temperatures, and are a major reason the entire planet warmed and cooled during glacial cycles, not just the frozen poles.

Today, however, CO2 levels have soared to 420 p.p.m. — the highest they’ve been in at least three million years. The concentration of CO2 is also increasing about 100 times faster than it did at the end of the last ice age. This suggests something else is going on, and we know what it is: Since the Industrial Revolution, humans have been burning fossil fuels and releasing greenhouse gases that are heating the planet now (see Question 5 for more details on how we know this, and Questions 4 and 8 for how we know that other natural forces aren’t to blame).

Over the next century or two, societies and ecosystems will experience the consequences of this climate change. But our emissions will have even more lasting geologic impacts: According to some studies, greenhouse gas levels may have already warmed the planet enough to delay the onset of the next glacial cycle for at least an additional 50,000 years.

How do we know global warming is not because of the sun or volcanoes?

The sun is the ultimate source of energy in Earth’s climate system, so it’s a natural candidate for causing climate change. And solar activity has certainly changed over time. We know from satellite measurements and other astronomical observations that the sun’s output changes on 11-year cycles. Geologic records and sunspot numbers, which astronomers have tracked for centuries, also show long-term variations in the sun’s activity, including some exceptionally quiet periods in the late 1600s and early 1800s.

We know that, from 1900 until the 1950s, solar irradiance increased. And studies suggest that this had a modest effect on early 20th century climate, explaining up to 10 percent of the warming that’s occurred since the late 1800s. However, in the second half of the century, when the most warming occurred, solar activity actually declined. This disparity is one of the main reasons we know that the sun is not the driving force behind climate change.

Another reason we know that solar activity hasn’t caused recent warming is that, if it had, all the layers of the atmosphere should be heating up. Instead, data show that the upper atmosphere has actually cooled in recent decades — a hallmark of greenhouse warming.

So how about volcanoes? Eruptions cool the planet by injecting ash and aerosol particles into the atmosphere that reflect sunlight. We’ve observed this effect in the years following large eruptions. There are also some notable historical examples, like when Iceland’s Laki volcano erupted in 1783, causing widespread crop failures in Europe and beyond, and the “year without a summer,” which followed the 1815 eruption of Mount Tambora in Indonesia.

Since volcanoes mainly act as climate coolers, they can’t really explain recent warming. However, scientists say that they may also have contributed slightly to rising temperatures in the early 20th century. That’s because there were several large eruptions in the late 1800s that cooled the planet, followed by a few decades with no major volcanic events when warming caught up. During the second half of the 20th century, though, several big eruptions occurred as the planet was heating up fast. If anything, they temporarily masked some amount of human-caused warming.

The second way volcanoes can impact climate is by emitting carbon dioxide. This is important on time scales of millions of years — it’s what keeps the planet habitable (see Question 5 for more on the greenhouse effect). But by comparison to modern anthropogenic emissions, even big eruptions like Krakatoa and Mount St. Helens are just a drop in the bucket. After all, they last only a few hours or days, while we burn fossil fuels 24-7. Studies suggest that, today, volcanoes account for 1 to 2 percent of total CO2 emissions.

Back to top.

How can winters and certain places be getting colder if the planet is warming?

When a big snowstorm hits the United States, climate denialists can try to cite it as proof that climate change isn’t happening. In 2015, Senator James Inhofe, an Oklahoma Republican, famously lobbed a snowball in the Senate as he denounced climate science. But these events don’t actually disprove climate change.

While there have been some memorable storms in recent years, winters are actually warming across the world. In the United States, average temperatures in December, January and February have increased by about 2.5 degrees this century.

On the flip side, record cold days are becoming less common than record warm days. In the United States, record highs now outnumber record lows two-to-one. And ever-smaller areas of the country experience extremely cold winter temperatures. (The same trends are happening globally.)

So what’s with the blizzards? Weather always varies, so it’s no surprise that we still have severe winter storms even as average temperatures rise. However, some studies suggest that climate change may be to blame. One possibility is that rapid Arctic warming has affected atmospheric circulation, including the fast-flowing, high-altitude air that usually swirls over the North Pole (a.k.a. the Polar Vortex). Some studies suggest that these changes are bringing more frigid temperatures to lower latitudes and causing weather systems to stall, allowing storms to produce more snowfall. This may explain what we’ve experienced in the U.S. over the past few decades, as well as a wintertime cooling trend in Siberia, although exactly how the Arctic affects global weather remains a topic of ongoing scientific debate.

Climate change may also explain the apparent paradox behind some of the other places on Earth that haven’t warmed much. For instance, a splotch of water in the North Atlantic has cooled in recent years, and scientists say they suspect that may be because ocean circulation is slowing as a result of freshwater streaming off a melting Greenland. If this circulation grinds almost to a halt, as it’s done in the geologic past, it would alter weather patterns around the world.

Not all cold weather stems from some counterintuitive consequence of climate change. But it’s a good reminder that Earth’s climate system is complex and chaotic, so the effects of human-caused changes will play out differently in different places. That’s why “global warming” is a bit of an oversimplification. Instead, some scientists have suggested that the phenomenon of human-caused climate change would more aptly be called “global weirding.”

Back to top.

Wildfires and bad weather have always happened. How do we know there’s a connection to climate change?

Extreme weather and natural disasters are part of life on Earth — just ask the dinosaurs. But there is good evidence that climate change has increased the frequency and severity of certain phenomena like heat waves, droughts and floods. Recent research has also allowed scientists to identify the influence of climate change on specific events.

Let’s start with heat waves. Studies show that stretches of abnormally high temperatures now happen about fivetimes more often than they would without climate change, and they last longer, too. Climate models project that, by the 2040s, heat waves will be about 12 times more frequent. And that’s concerning since extreme heat often causes increased hospitalizations and deaths, particularly among older people and those with underlying health conditions. In the summer of 2003, for example, a heat wave caused an estimated 70,000 excess deaths across Europe. (Human-caused warming amplified the death toll.)

Climate change has also exacerbated droughts, primarily by increasing evaporation. Droughts occur naturally because of random climate variability and factors like whether El Niño or La Niña conditions prevail in the tropical Pacific. But some researchers have found evidence that greenhouse warming has been affecting droughts since even before the Dust Bowl. And it continues to do so today. According to one analysis, the drought that afflicted the American Southwest from 2000 to 2018 was almost 50 percent more severe because of climate change. It was the worst drought the region had experienced in more than 1,000 years.

Rising temperatures have also increased the intensity of heavy precipitation events and the flooding that often follows. For example, studies have found that, because warmer air holds more moisture, Hurricane Harvey, which struck Houston in 2017, dropped between 15 and 40 percent more rainfall than it would have without climate change.

It’s still unclear whether climate change is changing the overall frequency of hurricanes, but it is making them stronger. And warming appears to favor certain kinds of weather patterns, like the “Midwest Water Hose” events that caused devastating flooding across the Midwest in 2019.

It’s important to remember that in most natural disasters, there are multiple factors at play. For instance, the 2019 Midwest floods occurred after a recent cold snap had frozen the ground solid, preventing the soil from absorbing rainwater and increasing runoff into the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers. These waterways have also been reshaped by levees and other forms of river engineering, some of which failed in the floods.

Wildfires are another phenomenon with multiple causes. In many places, fire risk has increased because humans have aggressively fought natural fires and prevented Indigenous peoples from carrying out traditional burning practices. This has allowed fuel to accumulate that makes current fires worse.

However, climate change still plays a major role by heating and drying forests, turning them into tinderboxes. Studies show that warming is the driving factor behind the recent increases in wildfires; one analysis found that climate change is responsible for doubling the area burned across the American West between 1984 and 2015. And researchers say that warming will only make fires bigger and more dangerous in the future.

Back to top.

How bad are the effects of climate change going to be?

It depends on how aggressively we act to address climate change. If we continue with business as usual, by the end of the century, it will be too hot to go outside during heat waves in the Middle East and South Asia. Droughts will grip Central America, the Mediterranean and southern Africa. And many island nations and low-lying areas, from Texas to Bangladesh, will be overtaken by rising seas. Conversely, climate change could bring welcome warming and extended growing seasons to the upper Midwest, Canada, the Nordic countries and Russia. Farther north, however, the loss of snow, ice and permafrost will upend the traditions of Indigenous peoples and threaten infrastructure.

It’s complicated, but the underlying message is simple: unchecked climate change will likely exacerbate existing inequalities. At a national level, poorer countries will be hit hardest, even though they have historically emitted only a fraction of the greenhouse gases that cause warming. That’s because many less developed countries tend to be in tropical regions where additional warming will make the climate increasingly intolerable for humans and crops. These nations also often have greater vulnerabilities, like large coastal populations and people living in improvised housing that is easily damaged in storms. And they have fewer resources to adapt, which will require expensive measures like redesigning cities, engineering coastlines and changing how people grow food.

Already, between 1961 and 2000, climate change appears to have harmed the economies of the poorest countries while boosting the fortunes of the wealthiest nations that have done the most to cause the problem, making the global wealth gap 25 percent bigger than it would otherwise have been. Similarly, the Global Climate Risk Index found that lower income countries — like Myanmar, Haiti and Nepal — rank high on the list of nations most affected by extreme weather between 1999 and 2018. Climate change has also contributed to increased human migration, which is expected to increase significantly.

Even within wealthy countries, the poor and marginalized will suffer the most. People with more resources have greater buffers, like air-conditioners to keep their houses cool during dangerous heat waves, and the means to pay the resulting energy bills. They also have an easier time evacuating their homes before disasters, and recovering afterward. Lower income people have fewer of these advantages, and they are also more likely to live in hotter neighborhoods and work outdoors, where they face the brunt of climate change.

These inequalities will play out on an individual, community, and regional level. A 2017 analysis of the U.S. found that, under business as usual, the poorest one-third of counties, which are concentrated in the South, will experience damages totaling as much as 20 percent of gross domestic product, while others, mostly in the northern part of the country, will see modest economic gains. Solomon Hsiang, an economist at University of California, Berkeley, and the lead author of the study, has said that climate change “may result in the largest transfer of wealth from the poor to the rich in the country’s history.”

Even the climate “winners” will not be immune from all climate impacts, though. Desirable locations will face an influx of migrants. And as the coronavirus pandemic has demonstrated, disasters in one place quickly ripple across our globalized economy. For instance, scientists expect climate change to increase the odds of multiple crop failures occurring at the same time in different places, throwing the world into a food crisis.

On top of that, warmer weather is aiding the spread of infectious diseases and the vectors that transmit them, like ticks and mosquitoes. Research has also identified troubling correlations between rising temperatures and increased interpersonal violence, and climate change is widely recognized as a “threat multiplier” that increases the odds of larger conflicts within and between countries. In other words, climate change will bring many changes that no amount of money can stop. What could help is taking action to limit warming.

Back to top.

What will it cost to do something about climate change, versus doing nothing?

One of the most common arguments against taking aggressive action to combat climate change is that doing so will kill jobs and cripple the economy. But this implies that there’s an alternative in which we pay nothing for climate change. And unfortunately, there isn’t. In reality, not tackling climate change will cost a lot, and cause enormous human suffering and ecological damage, while transitioning to a greener economy would benefit many people and ecosystems around the world.

Let’s start with how much it will cost to address climate change. To keep warming well below 2 degrees Celsius, the goal of the Paris Climate Agreement, society will have to reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions by the middle of this century. That will require significant investments in things like renewable energy, electric cars and charging infrastructure, not to mention efforts to adapt to hotter temperatures, rising sea-levels and other unavoidable effects of current climate changes. And we’ll have to make changes fast.

Estimates of the cost vary widely. One recent study found that keeping warming to 2 degrees Celsius would require a total investment of between $4 trillion and $60 trillion, with a median estimate of $16 trillion, while keeping warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius could cost between $10 trillion and $100 trillion, with a median estimate of $30 trillion. (For reference, the entire world economy was about $88 trillion in 2019.) Other studies have found that reaching net zero will require annual investments ranging from less than 1.5 percent of global gross domestic product to as much as 4 percent. That’s a lot, but within the range of historical energy investments in countries like the U.S.

Now, let’s consider the costs of unchecked climate change, which will fall hardest on the most vulnerable. These include damage to property and infrastructure from sea-level rise and extreme weather, death and sickness linked to natural disasters, pollution and infectious disease, reduced agricultural yields and lost labor productivity because of rising temperatures, decreased water availability and increased energy costs, and species extinction and habitat destruction. Dr. Hsiang, the U.C. Berkeley economist, describes it as “death by a thousand cuts.”

As a result, climate damages are hard to quantify. Moody’s Analytics estimates that even 2 degrees Celsius of warming will cost the world $69 trillion by 2100, and economists expect the toll to keep rising with the temperature. In a recent survey, economists estimated the cost would equal 5 percent of global G.D.P. at 3 degrees Celsius of warming (our trajectory under current policies) and 10 percent for 5 degrees Celsius. Other research indicates that, if current warming trends continue, global G.D.P. per capita will decrease between 7 percentand 23 percent by the end of the century — an economic blow equivalent to multiple coronavirus pandemics every year. And some fear these are vast underestimates.

Already, studies suggest that climate change has slashed incomes in the poorest countries by as much as 30 percent and reducedglobal agricultural productivity by 21 percent since 1961. Extreme weather events have also racked up a large bill. In 2020, in the United States alone, climate-related disasters like hurricanes, droughts, and wildfires caused nearly $100 billion in damages to businesses, property and infrastructure, compared to an average of $18 billion per year in the 1980s.

Given the steep price of inaction, many economists say that addressing climate change is a better deal. It’s like that old saying: an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. In this case, limiting warming will greatly reduce future damage and inequality caused by climate change. It will also produce so-called co-benefits, like saving one million lives every year by reducing air pollution, and millions more from eating healthier, climate-friendly diets. Some studies even find that meeting the Paris Agreement goals could create jobs and increase global G.D.P. And, of course, reining in climate change will spare many species and ecosystems upon which humans depend — and which many people believe to have their own innate value.

The challenge is that we need to reduce emissions now to avoid damages later, which requires big investments over the next few decades. And the longer we delay, the more we will pay to meet the Paris goals. One recent analysis found that reaching net-zero by 2050 would cost the U.S. almost twice as much if we waited until 2030 instead of acting now. But even if we miss the Paris target, the economics still make a strong case for climate action, because every additional degree of warming will cost us more — in dollars, and in lives.

Two dozen federal agencies flagged the biggest dangers posed by a warming planet. The list spreads across American society.

WASHINGTON — Less food. More traffic accidents. Extreme weather hitting nuclear waste sites. Migrants rushing toward the United States, fleeing even worse calamity in their own countries.

Those scenarios, once the stuff of dystopian fiction, are now driving American policymaking. Under orders from President Biden, top officials at every government agency have spent months considering the top climate threats their agencies face, and how to cope with them.

On Thursday, the White House offered a first look at the results, releasing the climate-adaptation plans of 23 agencies, including the departments of Energy, Defense, Agriculture, Homeland Security, Transportation and Commerce. The plans reveal the dangers posed by a warming planet to every aspect of American life, and the difficulty of coping with those threats.

The federal government has attempted this exercise before, during the Obama administration. That work effectively stopped under former President Donald J. Trump, whose disdain for climate science led most agencies to either shelve their planning for climate change or stop talking about it.

Within weeks of taking office, President Biden directed officials to quickly resume the work. Stressing the urgency of the threat, the president gave agencies four months to come up with plans that listed their main vulnerabilities to climate change and strategies to address them.

“Nearly every service that the government provides will be impacted by climate change sooner or later,” said Jesse Keenan, a professor at Tulane University who focuses on climate adaptation and has advised federal agencies.

The plans released Thursday are brief, many of them fewer than 30 pages. They include core themes: ensuring that new facilities meet tougher construction standards, using less energy and water at existing buildings, better protecting workers against extreme heat, educating staff about climate science, and creating supply chains that are less likely to be disrupted by storms or other shocks.

The documents also reflect Mr. Biden’s emphasis on racial equity, looking at the effects of climate change on minority and low-income communities and how agencies can address them. For example, the Department of Health and Human Services said it will focus research grants on the health effects on those communities.

But the most revealing information in the newly released plans could be their description, sometimes in frank terms, of the dangers that climate change holds.

Agriculture

The Department of Agriculture lists the ways climate change threatens America’s food supply: Changes in temperature and precipitation patterns, more pests and disease, reduced soil quality, fewer pollinating insects and more storms and wildfires will combine to reduce crops and livestock.

To address those challenges, the department calls for more research into climate threats, and better communication of those findings to farmers.

The plan is also candid about the limits of what can be done. In response to drought, for example, farmers can build new irrigation systems, and governments can build new dams. But irrigation is expensive, the department notes, and dams affect the ecosystems around them.

Transportation

Climate change also threatens Americans’ ability to move within and between cities, restricting not just mobility but the transportation of goods that drive the economy. In a list of potential effects from climate change, the Department of Transportation notes that rising temperatures will make it more expensive to build and maintain roads and bridges.

And the experience of getting around will become slower and more frustrating. As hotter days cause asphalt to degrade, congestion will increase as traffic slows. Severe weather events will “require flight cancellations, sometimes for extended periods of time,” and more heat will force planes to fly shorter distances and carry less weight.

Some of the effects the transportation department anticipates are dangerous. They include “more frequent/severe flooding of underground tunnels” and “increased risk of vehicle crashes in severe weather.”

Even the quality of driving could get worse. The plan warns of “decreased driver/operator performance and decision-making skills, due to driver fatigue as a result of adverse weather.”

Energy

Sometimes, the plans demonstrate how much work remains. The Department of Energy, for example, said it has assessed the climate risks for just half of its sites, which range from advanced research laboratories to storage facilities for radioactive waste from the nuclear weapons program.

“DOE’s nuclear security mission is critical to national security and is also largely conducted at DOE sites that are vulnerable to extreme weather conditions,” the department’s plan says. “DOE’s environmental mission could also experience disruptions if facilities dedicated to radioactive waste processing and disposal are impacted by climate hazards.”

The department says it’s able to address that threat, but doesn’t go into specifics. “DOE has a well-established hazard assessment and adaptation process focused on its high-hazard nuclear facilities. This process ensures that the most critical facilities are well protected from climate risks,” the plan states.

Homeland Security

For the Department of Homeland Security, climate change means the risk of large numbers of climate refugees — people reaching the U.S. border, pushed out of their countries by a mix of long-term challenges like drought or sudden shocks like a tsunami.

“Climate change is likely to increase population movements from Mexico, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean,” the department’s plan reads. The department is trying to develop “a responsive and coordinated operational plan for mass migration events,” it said.

The plan comes just weeks after President Biden condemned Border Patrol officers on horseback for their treatment of Haitian migrants crossing the border into Texas. The administration then faced criticism for sending many of those migrants back to Haiti, which is still struggling from just the sort of environmental challenges described in the plan.

The department doesn’t say how it plans to respond in the future as more people flee to the United States, beyond saying it “will focus on national security and balanced, equitable outcomes.”

Defense

Climate change will lead to new sources of conflict, and also make it harder for the military to operate, the Department of Defense wrote in its climate plan.

Water shortages could even become a new source of tension between the U.S. military overseas and the countries where troops are based. At DOD sites outside the United States, “military water requirements might compete with local water needs, creating potential areas of friction or even conflict.”

But learning to operate during extreme weather should also be viewed as a new type of weapon, the plan says, one that can help the United States prevail over enemies. “This enables U.S. forces to gain distinct advantages over potential adversaries,” the plan reads, “if our forces can operate in conditions where others must take shelter or go to ground.”

Commerce

Not all of the climate threats facing the federal government are insurmountable.

The Department of Commerce, which runs the U.S. Patent and Trade Office, said that as the effects of climate change become more severe, it expects a surge in applications for patents for “climate change adaptation-related technologies.” Such a surge “would impact the department’s ability to process such applications in a timely manner, having a direct impact on U.S. competitiveness and economic growth.”

For that challenge, at least, there is a solution. For inventions that promise to help with environmental challenges, the department said, patent applications may be able to jump ahead in line — or, as the plan phrased it, “advanced out of turn for examination when a petition is filed.”

Just seven days into President Joe Biden's administration, he declared that the United States must "meet the moment" and raise our "climate ambition." He backed that sentiment up with a set of sweeping executive orders directing the government to place the climate crisis at the center of domestic and foreign policy decisions. It was a welcome change from past presidents who have too often waited until the end of their terms to take any bold action to protect the environment.

To many in the conservation movement, Biden's words sent a signal that perhaps the U.S. was finally willing to address the climate crisis with the urgency it demands. However, now eight months later, Biden's climate signal has not only faded - it's been replaced by a series of confounding mixed messages.

On Sept. 20, a federal judge in California rebuked the Biden administration in a lawsuit involving the failure to protect the Joshua tree, a species so iconic in the Western landscape that a national park bears its name. WildEarth Guardians brought this suit because the Trump administration refused to list the tree as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act - despite all available scientific evidence indicating that Joshua trees will be in danger of extinction by the end of this century from climate-change-driven habitat loss, wildfire and other stressors.

The Trump decision not to protect the Joshua tree was fundamentally grounded in climate change denial. The Biden administration went along with that position and defended it in court. Judge Otis D. Wright II, appointed by George W. Bush, ruled that the Department of the Interior acted "arbitrarily and capriciously" in ignoring the scientific evidence of climate-change-related threats to the survival of the species.

The ruling was handed down one day before Biden took the stage at the United Nations General Assembly and asked, "Will we meet the threat of challenging climate - the challenging climate we're all feeling already ravaging every part of our world with extreme weather?"

As the executive director of the organization that brought the Joshua tree case, I welcome all allies. Still, I was surprised that a judge appointed by a Republican president would understand the effect of climate change on an imperiled species better than the Biden administration.

Donald Trump spent four years eviscerating our environmental safety nets through the gutting of the Endangered Species Act, the Clean Water Act, the National Environmental Policy Act and other environmental laws. Environmental and public interest groups filed lawsuit after lawsuit to challenge those decisions and many of the cases outlasted the Trump administration.

Disturbingly, when presented with the opportunity to reverse course, the current administration has elected on multiple occasions to defend these policies in court, wasting federal resources and contravening Biden's own mandate to raise our climate ambitions.

In late August, the Interior Department finalized a Trump proposal to lease 80 million acres of public waters in the Gulf of Mexico to oil and gas extraction. Weeks later, the agency drafted a separate plan to open 700,000 acres of public lands to fracking, the majority being in the Rocky Mountain states, including my home state of New Mexico.

Both actions came despite Biden's own executive order placing a moratorium on new oil and natural gas leases on public lands or in offshore waters. In its environmental documentation on the gulf sale, the Biden administration went so far as to say that a recent United Nations report highlighting the severity of the climate crisis "does not present sufficient cause" to reconsider the Trump decision.

To be clear, Trump didn't merely gut environmental laws, he hollowed out the institutions that would enforce the few remaining protections left. Thus, the impact of Biden not restoring those laws isn't just damaging to wildlife, clean water and the climate - it further corrodes the morale of the civil servants charged with carrying them out.

That's why we desperately need the president to direct his Cabinet secretaries to move more aggressively to use the "whole of government" - as he said in his Jan. 27 climate executive order - to protect our endangered planet. Moreover, we need citizens to raise their voices and demand accountability from our political leaders.

We will be joining partners in Washington, D.C., on Oct. 11 for People vs. Fossil Fuels, a week of direct action led by Indigenous, brown and Black communities living on the front lines of the climate emergency. The demands are clear: Biden must direct agencies to reject fossil fuel projects and start treating the climate crisis like the emergency it is.

We're asking him to live up to his commitments. That could begin with standing up for the right side in court, but it must not stop there.

John Horning is the executive director of WildEarth Guardians, a nonprofit organization working to protect and restore the wildlife and the wild places of the American West.

Under a bill passed by the City Council, the mayor is required to create a plan to deal with the wide-ranging threats of climate change, from flooding to extreme heat.

After Hurricane Sandy battered New York nearly a decade ago, city leaders made bold promises that they would remake the city to survive higher temperatures and rising seas.

On Thursday, the City Council, pushed into action by the devastation of Hurricane Ida, moved to step up pressure on city government to honor those promises, approving legislation that requires City Hall to make a comprehensive plan to protect every city neighborhood from the threats of climate change.

Under the bill, the mayor must create the plan to deal with wide-ranging dangers — rising seas, extreme heat and floods from hurricanes and downpours — and a list of solutions that ensures that all agencies work together on the problem.

The legislation also seeks to remedy years of concerns that slow-moving plans to protect Lower Manhattan’s Financial District have eclipsed equally urgent needs in working-class neighborhoods, like those in Queens and Brooklyn where people died in last month’s flash floods caused by remnants of Hurricane Ida. It requires the plan, aimed at protecting the city’s residents and 520 miles of coastline, to assess the needs of each area and to find ways to first address the most vulnerable neighborhoods.

Mayor Bill de Blasio will not veto the bill, a City Hall spokesman said.

“It’s crazy this wasn’t done right after Sandy — it’s the obvious thing to do,” said the bill’s lead sponsor, Justin Brannan, a Democrat who represents Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.

While the measure does not have the power to mandate particular funding or a set of projects, figuring out the needs and potential costs — and ensuring that any administration must take into account the finding of the United Nations and city climate science panels and the recommendations of all relevant city agencies — is an overdue minimum step, Council members said.

“You can’t solve the problem if you don’t look at it in an comprehensive, transparent way,” Mr. Brannan said.

He said fixing sewers “may not be as sexy” as big projects to protect marquee Manhattan waterfronts, but every city decision large and small should consider the effects of climate change and how to manage them.

Eddie Bautista, the director of the New York City Environmental Justice Alliance, said that while a concrete action plan would be better, the bill gives advocates “a foothold to push the city” with more precision than the “inelegant tool” of broad mayoral plans has allowed in the past.

A bipartisan group of Council members who have pushed the measure for two years have long expressed frustration that the administrations of Mr. de Blasio and his predecessor, Michael R. Bloomberg, have not moved more quickly to protect New Yorkers who live in less wealthy, working-class neighborhoods.

City officials and lawmakers have taken a number of steps to bring post-Sandy plans to fruition, like pension-fund divestments from fossil-fuel companies, measures to curb the city’s emissions of planet-warming gases and efforts to shore up parts of Lower Manhattan, Staten Island and Queens from storm surges.

But by 2019, the city had spent just 54 percent of the $15 billion the federal government allocated after Sandy struck in 2012 to protect against climate-related dangers, and day-to-day climate-related policies were still in the hands of an alphabet soup of city, state and federal agencies.

That year Costa Constantinides, Mr. Brannan’s predecessor at the helm of the Council’s resiliency committee, and other city lawmakers introduced the first version of the bill.

It did not immediately win support from the mayor or Council leaders, but Ida, and the deaths of 15 New York City residents, most of whom died as basements flooded, changed the calculus, proponents of the measure say. Since Ida, Mr. de Blasio has released an updated climate resiliency plan that commits $2.7 billion in new funding and stresses the urgency of addressing problems like basement flooding. But with his term ending, most of the work will fall to his successor.

Eric Adams, the Democratic candidate and likely next mayor, also released a new climate plan — far more detailed than any he had presented during the primary campaign — after the Ida floods.

The Council measure has been expanded from earlier versions to cover a wider range of climate effects: not just waterfront flooding but extreme rainfall, heat, and wind and even wildfires. It requires the mayor to deliver the first plan by Sept. 30, 2022.

“It’s finally dawning on people, the scope of what climate change means for this town specifically,” Mr. Bautista said.

Humanity has a give-and-take relationship with the earth. What we use, we must try to replace. A simple idea, but it will take the best of human ingenuity to accomplish. Few people understand this more than those who grow our food.  Farmers rely on consistent weather patterns, and make weather-based decisions every day that affect the well-being of their crops. So, when those patterns become less predictable or more extreme due to a changing climate, they’re forced to find new solutions. Through new innovations and ever-evolving practices, agriculture is not only reacting to climate change, but working to mitigate it. Fighting climate change on the farm A changing climate can mean droughts are drier, rains are heavier, and winds and extreme weather are more threatening to crops. However, innovations in agriculture are helping farmers navigate these tough climate conditions.  Not all farms are flat. Most have high spots that dry quickly and low spots where water collects. Today, remote sensors can measure things like moisture, nitrogen and phosphorus levels in the soil, and tell farmers when one area might be desperate for water, and when another has plenty. This information can be crucial during a drought when farmers need to be more strategic with their water. 

What else could be useful during a drought? How about a crop that’s bred to tolerate it? Drought tolerant seeds help farmland stay productive during dry times. And, when the weather gets turbulent, we have plans for that, too. Bayer is looking forward and actively developing, solutions like short stature corn—a variety that’s bred to grow lower to the ground. That way, it’s less likely to snap in high winds, which reduces crop loss after a storm. Fighting climate change with the farm Carbon is a dirty word these days, but there is nothing inherently wrong with the sixth element on the periodic table. In fact, it’s essential to life on earth. The problem is when too much carbon dioxide is dumped unchecked into the atmosphere. Bayer is committed to advancing a carbon-neutral future for agriculture. A key part of this is reducing greenhouse gas emissions in agriculture fields. Through digital tools, improved plant genetics, and better water and soil management, Bayer is committed to reducing field greenhouse gas emissions produced by key crops in major agricultural markets by 30 percent by 2030. 

Curbing methane emissions with stronger riceBy 2050, the worldwide demand for rice will double. Adding to this challenge is the increasing irregularity of water sources globally, especially in parts of Asia where most of the world’s rice is grown.  Traditional rice transplanting, which requires farmers to manually transplant young seedlings into flooded paddies one-by-one, is labor and water-intensive—requiring about 5000 liters to produce one kilogram of rice. And, it creates an environment conducive to methane-emitting bacteria. That’s why Bayer has developed new hybrid varieties of rice that can be planted directly into dry fields.  Hybrids have a 19 percent lower carbon footprint than other traditional varieties and can be planted from tillers. These innovations are curbing methane emissions, reducing water dependence, and helping to relieve the manual labor burden on farming families throughout Asia. Let it lieTraditionally, farmers turned their fields over at the end of each season to remove weeds, but better weed control solutions mean they can leave the soil undisturbed after harvest. This has a two-fold benefit for the climate—it helps trap carbon in the soil for growing plants to use, and it reduces CO2 emissions by cutting tractor runtime. Like many modern agricultural practices, conservation tillage saves farmers resources like time and energy while being more sustainable. Preserving biodiversityConservation means doing what’s necessary while using less. Before the Green Revolution—a period of crucial advancements in plant biology during the middle of the 20th century—growing a bushel of corn took three times the amount of land it takes today.  Our planet isn’t getting any bigger, but our demands of it are. That’s why agriculture is finding ways to grow enough on the land we already use for farming. More efficient seeds allow for better harvests without expanding agricultural land. This encourages biodiversity and preserves “carbons sinks” like forests that sequester greenhouse gasses through natural processes. At the same time, new digital tools and data analytics that measure and control inputs—like water, fertilizer, and crop protection—are helping farmers grow enough without starving the planet.

The air around usThe invention of nitrogen fertilizers allowed farmers to meet the food demands of a growing global population over the 20th century. This innovation fed billions of people and saved countless lives. But, today, three percent of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions come from the use and production of these fertilizers. That’s why Bayer has partnered with Ginkgo Bioworks to form Joyn Bio, a joint venture that’s looking to use soil microorganisms and their nitrogen-fixing genes to help crops like corn, wheat, and rice extract nitrogen directly from the air, lowering farmers’ dependence on synthetic fertilizers. A more sustainable future means finding better answers to even our best solutions.  As the climate changes, so will agriculture. Solutions like the ones Bayer is working to create help farmers curb greenhouse gas emissions and preserve natural resources. Climate change is a threat we all have to address and innovations in science and technology are helping farmers lead the way.

Oct. 26—The N.H. Sierra Club has endorsed a host of candidates for state office, including several running to represent area towns.

In a prepared statement, Political Committee Chair Jim Allmendinger stressed the importance of halting climate change.

"So much is at stake, here in New Hampshire and elsewhere," he said. "Our waters, our air and our future do not allow for any delay in bringing clean, carbon-neutral energy into reality. Rising seas, rising temperatures, and melting glaciers are no respecters of vetoes from Governor Sununu. We need a governor and a legislature that will act and act for the good of us all."

The endorsed candidates include:

Dan Feltes, for governor. Feltes, a Concord Democrat and the N.H. Senate majority leader, is vying against incumbent Gov. Chris Sununu, a Newfields Republican, and Darryl W. Perry, a Manchester Libertarian.

Cinde Warmington, for N.H. Executive Council District 2. Warmington, a Concord Democrat, is running against Jim Beard, a Lempster Republican, in this district, which includes the area towns of Acworth, Alstead, Charlestown, Chesterfield, Dublin, Gilsum, Hancock, Harrisville, Hinsdale, Keene, Langdon, Marlborough, Marlow, Nelson, Roxbury, Stoddard, Sullivan, Surry, Walpole, Westmoreland and Winchester.

Incumbent N.H. Executive Councilor Debora B. Pignatelli, for re-election in District 5. Pignatelli, D-Nashua, is running against Dave Wheeler, a Milford Republican, in this district, which includes the local communities of Antrim, Bennington, Fitzwilliam, Greenfield, Jaffrey, Peterborough, Richmond, Rindge, Swanzey and Troy.

Jenn Alford-Teaster, for N.H. Senate District 8. Alford-Teaster is a Bradford Democrat hoping to unseat incumbent N.H. Sen. Ruth Ward, R-Stoddard. This district includes the local communities of Acworth, Antrim, Bennington, Langdon, Marlow and Stoddard.

Incumbent N.H. Sen. Jeanne Dietsch, for re-election in Senate District 9. Dietsch, D-Peterborough, is hoping to fend off a challenge from Denise Ricciardi, a Bedford Republican. The district includes the local communities of Dublin, Fitzwilliam, Greenfield, Hancock, Jaffrey, Peterborough, Richmond and Troy.

Incumbent N.H. Sen. Jay Kahn, for re-election in Senate District 10. Kahn, D-Keene, is running against Daniel LeClair, a Swanzey Republican. The district covers Alstead, Chesterfield, Gilsum, Harrisville, Hinsdale, Keene, Marlborough, Nelson, Roxbury, Sullivan, Surry, Swanzey, Walpole, Westmoreland and Winchester.

Incumbent N.H. Sen. Melanie Levesque, for re-election in Senate District 12. Levesque, D-Brookline, is running against Kevin Avard, a Nashua Republican. Locally, the district includes Rindge.

Incumbent N.H. Rep. Paul Berch, for re-election in the N.H. House's Cheshire County District 1. Berch, D-Westmoreland, is running along with incumbent Rep. Michael D. Abbott, D-Hinsdale; Whitney R. Aldrich, a Walpole Republican; Peter Benik, a Walpole Republican; Kate Day, a Chesterfield Republican; incumbent Rep. Cathryn A. Harvey, D-Chesterfield; Richard Merkt, a Westmoreland Republican; and incumbent Rep. Lucy McVitty Weber, D-Walpole. There are four seats in this district, which covers Chesterfield, Hinsdale, Walpole and Westmoreland.

Lawrence Welkowitz, for N.H. House, Cheshire County District 4. Welkowitz, a Democrat, is running unopposed for the seat in this district, which covers Keene's Ward 1.

Lucius Parshall, for N.H. House, Cheshire County District 10. Parshall, a Marlborough Democrat, is running against Dick Thackston, a Troy Republican. The district covers Marlborough and Troy.

Patricia A. Martin, for N.H. House, Cheshire County District 11. Martin, a Rindge Democrat, is running along with Gene Andersen, a Rindge Democrat; incumbent N.H. Rep. John B. Hunt, R-Rindge; and Jim Qualey, a Rindge Republican. This district has two seats and covers Fitzwilliam and Rindge.

Andrew Maneval, for N.H. House, Cheshire County District 14. Maneval, a Harrisville Democrat, is running against Matthew John Santonastaso, a Rindge Republican. The district covers Dublin, Fitzwilliam, Harrisville, Jaffrey, Rindge and Roxbury.

Incumbent N.H. Rep. Joe Schapiro, for re-election in the N.H. House, Cheshire County District 16. Schapiro, a Democrat, is running along with Matt Roach, a Republican; Jerry L. Sickels, a Republican; and Amanda Elizabeth Toll, a Democrat. This district has two seats and covers all five of Keene's wards.

Claudia Istel, for N.H. House, Sullivan County District 7. Istel, an Acworth Democrat, is hoping to unseat incumbent N.H. Rep. Judy Aron, R-Acworth. The district includes the local communities of Acworth and Langdon.

The general election is Nov. 3.

___ (c)2020 The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) Visit The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) at www.sentinelsource.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

Dec. 8—PETERBOROUGH — Peterborough voters this spring may consider adopting a goal for the town to shift entirely to renewable energy within the next three decades.

Peterborough Energy Action, a group that promotes clean energy use, is proposing a warrant article for May's town meeting, according to member Dori Drachman.

"We want to pass a warrant article this spring that will commit Peterborough to work toward ... transitioning to 100 percent clean energy for all of our residents and businesses," Drachman said in a Dec. 1 presentation to the Peterborough selectboard. "Specifically, we are going to set goals for clean electricity by 2030 and clean heat and transportation by 2050. And to help us reach those goals, we are asking to create an energy plan by the end of 2022."

The electricity, heating and transportation targets are identical to those the Keene City Council adopted in January 2019.

There are four other New Hampshire communities, aside from Keene, that are currently working on similar energy plans: Hanover, Plainfield, Cornish and Concord, according to Drachman. She said Peterborough Energy Action is working on the proposal with Keene, where the Energy and Climate Committee is gearing up to submit the final version of its own energy plan to the City Council.

Addressing the Peterborough selectboard at its Dec. 1 meeting, which was held via Zoom, Drachman said there's little time to spare in implementing this plan. Many scientists agree global temperature changes must be kept within 1.5 degrees Celsius to avert the worst impacts of climate change, she noted. To do this, she said, carbon emissions must be cut dramatically.

"We have to reduce our emissions by half by 2030, and they have to be down to zero by 2050," she said. "The longer we wait, the more damage will be done and the more expensive it will be to adapt. So there's no time to lose."

In New Hampshire, she said failing to address these concerns could lead to warmer winters, intensified periods of drought and then flooding during the growing season, the migration or dying off of wildlife, and the loss of the trees that contribute to the state's beloved autumn foliage — particularly the sugar maple.

A community power program is being explored as a means of moving Peterborough toward 100 percent renewable electricity. This is also a key element of Keene's plan, and Drachman said the Peterborough Energy Committee, a town committee that is separate from the Peterborough Energy Action group, will seek to give a presentation on this topic to the selectboard in the near future.

Community power programs, which became possible in New Hampshire under a 2019 state law, allow municipalities to purchase power that can then be sold back to their citizens and business owners. They enable municipalities to not only look for the best deals, but also to have more say in where their power comes from.

"We see it as such an important tool, a real game-changer actually, in the effort to reduce our emissions," Drachman said. She also said it's an option that allows individuals of all income levels to get their power from clean sources.

Selectmen Tyler Ward and Ed Juengst both expressed support for the plan, saying the message is important and they're glad to see the work that has been done to prepare it to be submitted as a warrant article. Ward said he thinks bringing the idea to voters during the 2021 town meeting is a good way to proceed.

Drachman said a series of community forums will be organized over the next few months, with the first set for Jan. 28. More information about that meeting can be found at www.peterboroughenergyaction.org.

Mia Summerson can be reached at 352-1234, extension 1435, or msummerson@keenesentinel.com Follow her on Twitter @MiaSummerson

___ (c)2020 The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) Visit The Keene Sentinel (Keene, N.H.) at www.sentinelsource.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.

As the BDN editorial board sets out to take a focused look at four issues this year, our work will depend in part on engagement and input from our readers. After selecting workforce development, referendum reform, the local costs and challenges of rural living as three areas to take a close look at in 2019, we asked the community to help us pick a fourth.


Thankfully, you weren't shy about sharing your opinions. We received roughly 250 responses by email and on social media. And while there was a diverse and interesting mix of topics suggested, one concern was clearly the most popular: climate change.


"Changes in our climate will affect every area of Maine life and its economy, from agriculture to tourism and beyond," one reader said.


"We must contribute to the solution by reducing our greenhouse gas emissions in Maine, and embrace cost-effective adaptation for the impacts we are already experiencing from our marine fisheries to farms to forests to the health of our citizens," another said.


[Farming clams in Maine could help save them from climate change]


But, of course, the impact of climate change it is not the only issue at hand. Readers' suggestions to focus on health care, taxes, tribal relations, prison reform, education, broadband and numerous other issues are no less valid or worthwhile. Many of those issues are inexorably linked with our four stated focus areas, and we will surely address them in that context, and others, in the coming year.


Importantly, our work in 2019 will not be limited strictly to workforce, referendum, rural and climate issues. We will still tackle various topics of the day as they arise or require further review. But the focus areas will guide our overall assessment of work in Augusta -- and across the state -- this year.


Nationally, climate change has taken a back seat. The Trump administration has moved us backward by pledging to withdraw the U.S. from the Paris climate change agreement and rolling back environmental protection regulations. These moves -- and the debate about them -- have stolen much of the oxygen in our national discourse and debate.


Against this backdrop, the federal government released a report in November that warns of climate change's potentially devastating consequences around the world. It's a warning we should heed.


[Gulf of Maine is having 3rd warmest year on record]


With a new administration here in Maine, already-tangible examples of climate change and its impacts around the state, and members of the research and business communities engaged on the issue, our state has an opportunity to dedicate time and energy to changing policies and practices.


Researchers from the Climate Change Institute at the University of Maine recently released a report analyzing historical climate trends and potential impacts of climate change on coastal Maine, particularly in the context of the agriculture and fishing industries. It's not without irony that the report details how in some cases -- longer growing seasons for crops and a warming Gulf of Maine that has bolstered the lobster industry in the short term, for instance -- our clearly changing climate has actually been beneficial in some ways thus far.


But that evidence, coupled with the expectation of continued warming of both the atmosphere and oceans, spells long-term danger for Maine's economy and underscores the importance of preparedness.


We can acknowledge the complicated and often sobering realities of a changing climate and begin to take action while also realizing that Maine is a relatively small player in the climate equation.


[Susan Collins: Ignoring climate change is 'simply not a solution']


In her inaugural address, Mills proclaimed on climate change, "enough with studies, talk, and debate. It is time to act!"


The appeal to action is understandable, after eight years of climate skepticism from former Gov. Paul LePage. But let's not throw studies, talk and debate out the window as we continue to understand these very real and very concerning climate trends -- particularly as they relate to the economic and environmental impacts that we're already seeing in Maine.


Our focus on climate change in Maine will be guided by an effort to understand its causes, impacts and potential solutions -- and we'll be open to different and divergent views on all of those fronts. But the discussion begins with an understanding that climate change is, in fact, happening. We will not waste time debating its well-documented existence, and neither should policymakers.

President Donald Trump is expected to issue an executive order soon to reverse Obama-era rules to cut carbon pollution, including a moratorium on leasing public lands for coal mining and a plan to reduce carbon emissions from power plants.


Trump and his appointees argue that these steps will bring coal miners' jobs back (although coal industry job losses reflect competition from cheap natural gas, not regulations that have yet to take effect). But they ignore the fact that mitigating climate change will produce large economic gains.


While burning fossil fuels produces benefits, such as powering the electric grid and fueling cars, it also generates widespread costs to society -- including damages from climate change that affect people around the world now and in the future. Public policies that reduce carbon pollution deliver benefits by avoiding these damages.


Since the Reagan administration, federal agencies have been required to enact only regulations whose potential benefits to society justify or outweigh their potential costs. To quantify benefits from acting to curb climate change, the U.S. government developed a formal measure in 2009 of the value of reducing carbon pollution, which is referred to as the social cost of carbon, or SCC. Currently, federal agencies use an SCC figure of about $40 per ton in today's dollars.


Now the Trump administration and critics in Congress may reduce this figure or even stop using it. Environmental Protection Agency Administrator Scott Pruitt's recent comment that carbon dioxide is not "a primary contributor" to climate change suggests that Pruitt may challenge the agency's 2009 finding that carbon emissions are pollutants and threaten human health.


As an economist for the White House, I was a member of the working group that developed the first government-wide SCC estimate. We can always improve our processes for estimating and using the SCC, but getting rid of it would be a mistake. A well-functioning democracy needs transparency about the economic benefits of investments driven by public policy -- as well as the benefits we give up when we walk away from making these investments.The value of avoiding hurricanes, wildfires


Scientists widely agree that carbon dioxide emissions, primarily from burning fossil fuels, pose significant risks to Earth's climate. Intuitively, it makes sense that reducing carbon emissions benefits society by reducing risks of flooding, wildfires, storms and other impacts associated with severe climate change.


We can estimate the benefits of many goods and services, from pop music to recreation, from the prices people pay for them in markets. But valuing environmental benefits is not so simple. Americans can't go to the store and buy a stable climate.


Carbon pollution drives global warming that causes many different impacts on the natural and built environment and human health. Because carbon emissions have such broad and diverse impacts, scholars have developed models to characterize the economic benefits (or costs) of reducing them.


Current U.S. government practice draws from three peer-reviewed integrated assessment models. An integrated assessment model represents a chain of events, starting with economic activities that involve fossil fuel combustion. This generates carbon emissions, which contribute to climate change.


And climate change causes outcomes that can be measured in monetary terms. For example, rising carbon pollution will increase the likelihood of lower agricultural yields, threaten public health through heat stress, and damage infrastructure through floods and intense storms.Thousands of scenarios


The social cost of carbon represents the damages of 1 ton of carbon dioxide emitted into the air. To estimate it, economists run models that forecast varying levels of carbon dioxide emissions. They can then model and compare two forecasts -- one with slightly higher emissions than the other. The difference in total climate change damages represents the social cost of carbon.


Carbon pollution can remain in the atmosphere for up to 200 years, so these models are run over a century or more in order to account for long-term damages that carbon emissions impose on society.


SCC estimates are based on chains of events that include many uncertainties -- for example, how many tons of carbon will be emitted in a given year, the amount of warming that will result, and how severely this warming will exacerbate risks like floods and heat waves. Since we cannot predict any single scenario with certainty, the U.S. government has modeled hundreds of thousands of different scenarios to produce its SCC estimates.


Some model scenarios, based on admittedly extreme assumptions, produce negative SCC estimates; that is, they find that carbon pollution is good for the planet. But the vast majority of scenarios show that carbon pollution is bad for the planet, and that on average, every ton of carbon dioxide emitted into the atmosphere imposes damages equal to about $40 in today's dollars.Balancing costs, benefits of regulations


The federal government began calculating a social cost of carbon after the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit ruled in 2007 that the U.S. Department of Transportation had to account for climate benefits from its regulations to improve automobile fuel economy. Environmental groups and a dozen states challenged the regulations, in part because the Bush administration had valued the benefits of cutting carbon dioxide emissions at zero.


In response, the Obama administration created a working group in 2009 with officials from 12 agencies to develop the federal government's first official SCC estimate. Our initial figure of $25 for 2010 was updated in 2013, 2015 and 2016, reflecting updates in the underlying models.


Agencies have used these estimates in benefit-cost analyses for scores of federal regulations, including the Environmental Protection Agency's Clean Power Plan, the Department of Transportation's medium and heavy-duty vehicle fuel economy standards, and the U.S. Department of Energy's minimum efficiency standard for refrigerators and freezers. Some of these studies were required only by executive order, but others were required by law. Unless the authorizing statutes are amended, the Trump administration will have to produce analyses accounting for carbon pollution reduction benefits if it wants to issue new regulations that can withstand legal challenges.


The Trump administration could continue to use SCC estimates in regulatory evaluations, but water them down. For example, some scholars have called for focusing only on domestic benefits -- as opposed to total global benefits -- of reducing carbon pollution in the United States. Emitting a ton of carbon imposes damages in the U.S. and around the world, just as a ton emitted in Beijing imposes damages on the U.S. and other countries around the world. Considering only the domestic impacts of carbon pollution could lower the SCC by three-quarters.


But if the U.S. ignores the benefits of reducing carbon pollution that other countries enjoy, then those other countries may follow suit and consider only how cutting emissions will benefit them internally. This approach ignores the strategic value that serves as the primary motivation for countries to work together to combat climate change. The world would achieve much greater emissions reductions and greater net economic benefits if countries implement policies based on the global social cost of carbon instead of a domestic-only SCC.


As climate change science and economics continue to evolve, our tools for estimating benefits from reducing carbon pollution will need to evolve and improve. In January the National Academies of Sciences published a report that lays out an extensive research agenda for improving the estimation and use of the social cost of carbon.


The federal government has used used benefit-cost analysis to calculate society's bottom line from regulations for decades. So far, the Trump administration appears to be focused solely on costs -- an approach that maximizes the corporate bottom line, but leaves the public out of the equation.

