Climate change poses a major and immediate danger to the planet, and organic farmers can play a vital role in mitigating the threat, a Montana organic farmer says.
"Extreme weather variability, caused by climate change, is the greatest challenge facing farmers," said Doug Crabtree, a Havre, Mont., farmer and a director of the board of the Organic Trade Association, or OTA, which represents more than 9,500 organic businesses nationwide. Its members include growers, shippers, certifiers, farmers associations, distributors, importers, exporters, consultants, retailers and others.
The OTA has released a white paper, "Advancing Organic to Mitigate Climate Change," that contains 10 priorities for climate change policy:
Advance organic agriculture.
Are science-based, data-driven and verifiable.
 Focus on outcomes and continuous improvement.
Promote soil health and carbon sequestration.
Lower the use of fossil-fuel based chemicals.
 Provide solutions for mitigation and adaptation.
Incentivize farmers and businesses.
Decarbonize the economy.
Foster agricultural diversity and innovation.
Address equity and inclusion.
The use of synthetic nitrogen, in particular, is a major contributor to climate change, Crabtree said.
The report has a number of specific policy recommendations. They include establishing a national program to support transition for organic farmers, develop a competitive grant program to provide technical services to organic and transitioning farmers, and creating a federal Healthy Soils pilot program.
Climate change stance
Climate change is a controversial issue in agriculture, with many agriculturalists questioning its validity, especially the belief that human activity is primarily responsible. The organic industry report is clear on its stance:
"Climate change poses an existential threat to our world, and bold policy solutions are needed to mitigate the impacts and help farmers and communities adapt to the changing climate," the report said.
"The predominant cause of climate change is anthropogenic (human-caused) emissions of greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane. Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel combustion are the primary contributor to climate change, mainly due to the impacts of the electric power and transportation sector," according to the report.
Further, "Agriculture is a contributor to climate change, representing almost 10% of all greenhouse gas emissions in the United States Agriculture also contributes indirectly to greenhouse gas emissions in the electric power sector by driving the demand for manufacturing fossil fuel-based ammonia fertilizer," the report said.
The report made a sharp distinction in how organic and conventional agriculture affect climate change.
"Organic agriculture is distinct from conventional farming systems in its role in climate change. Whereas agriculture overall is a significant contributor to climate change and highly susceptible to its damaging impacts, organic agriculture is uniquely positioned to improve agricultural practices and outcomes that can help farmers mitigate and adapt to climate change," according to the report.
Crabtree said it's time to quit arguing over whether climate change is real and whether human activity is the primary cause. Instead, agriculturalists need to do what they can to address the problem.
If you followed the last few presidential elections closely and then went into a cave or a coma before emerging to witness our two recent presidential debates, you'd probably wonder what happened to climate change. Given the previously ubiquitous issue's sudden disappearance from public discourse, you'd probably figure it was solved.

It wasn't. We've just stopped talking about it, and I suppose that's because of the economic crisis.

But climate change is still with us. We published a stark reminder of that Wednesday from Bloomberg News.

The story indicated that the corn belt isn't just moving west, as we often observe here in South Dakota when we travel west of the Missouri River and see corn in places it couldn't be grown before. According to the Bloomberg story, the perceived westward expansion of the corn belt is something of an illusion. The corn belt isn't moving west so much as it is north, with the westward expansion tumbling out of the larger northward expansion.

That rings true, and we know it by looking around us. The story quoted an expert who said that because of the northward swelling of the corn belt, "the number of rail cars, the number of silos, the amount of loading capacity" is increasing in areas that were formerly beyond the corn belt's northern terminus. For evidence of that, just look to the Kimball/White Lake area, where a nearly $40 million rail-fed grain elevator on steroids has sprung up suddenly from the prairie. Similar facilities are popping up elsewhere in the northern Great Plains.

The story also noted that while Kansas farmers sowed their fewest corn acres in three years this past spring, corn acreage 700 miles to the north in the Canadian province of Manitoba has nearly doubled over the past decade.

And then there's this: "September was the 331st consecutive month in which temperatures worldwide topped the 20th-century average, the U.S. National Climatic Data Center said Monday."

Consider that again and let it sink in: 331 consecutive months of above-average temperatures. Meanwhile, we're dealing with the worst drought since 1954, which came suddenly after two of the wettest years on record.

Folks, those are the hallmarks of climate change. If you're still in denial, you need to get in touch with reality.

Given all these ongoing developments, it's terribly disappointing to hear no talk whatsoever about climate change in the presidential or any other campaign. Politicians this year are focusing mainly on the economy, and they probably should if they want to get elected. But climate change hasn't gone on hiatus while we deal with our economic concerns. Instead, the forces behind our evolving climate have seemingly taken advantage of our diverted attention to stealthily transform the world we thought we knew.

What's causing the climate to change? There is an abundance of evidence to suggest human influence and other evidence to suggest natural processes. Likely it's both. We should do what we can to minimize the human side of the equation -- on that, we should all simply agree. If you don't believe human activity is contributing to climate change, then you shouldn't mind if the rest of us try to reduce pollution. It won't hurt you to breathe cleaner air.

Beyond that, our leaders need to expand their focus past the trifling sound-bite crises that arise every day in our 24/7 news world and start pondering anew the real issue of climate change. It is already provoking wide-scale changes in our agricultural economy. Pastures are being plowed up and converted to crop land. Farmers are abandoning traditional crops and growing different ones. Accelerating drought and flood cycles are driving enormous expenditures in federally subsidized safety nets for farmers and ranchers.

Meanwhile, our political leaders are largely ignoring the situation. That's because avoidance is often an effective way for them to escape responsibility. Many things that seem important today simply vanish from public concern days or weeks later as people and the news cycle move on.

But that won't work with climate change. If we stick our head in the sand on this one, we're likely to get burned.
Minnesotans have reveled this week in some of the best weather of the year with a watchful eye to the nation's mid-Atlantic seaboard. If, as expected, Hurricane Florence makes landfall Thursday night at a vicious Category 3 level or greater, devastating damage is sure to result.

As is their wont, Minnesotans will respond with sympathy, donations and volunteer labor - and a touch of smugness. Minnesota didn't make a recent list of the nation's 25 most disaster-prone states, compiled by moneywise.com. This landlocked state is spared hurricanes. The risk of volcanoes and earthquakes is exceedingly low. Even tornadoes, which Minnesotans know and respect, are less frequent than in several other Midwestern states.

But Minnesotans should know this: The same climatological phenomenon that is adding potency to Florence this year and made hurricanes Harvey, Inez and Maria record-breakers last year is affecting this state, too. Climate change is making Minnesota a wetter place.

Just as higher Atlantic Ocean surface temperatures are fueling Florence's intensity, so higher temperatures in Minnesota are leading to more precipitation. The 30-year averages that produce what meteorologists deem "normal" precipitation levels have been climbing steadily throughout the state for a half-century, reports University of Minnesota emeritus professor and climatologist Mark Seeley. They are expected to keep climbing.

Already in the Twin Cities, normal annual precipitation has increased 20 percent, up from 25.93 inches in 1941-70 to 31.16 inches in 1981-2010. Seeley expects another boost when the next 30-year average is calculated in 2020, and another in 2030. In Greater Minnesota, precipitation levels are also up but in varying degrees, with the heavily agricultural counties of south-central Minnesota seeing increases in the 30-35 percent range, Seeley told an editorial writer.

Climate change also explains the increased frequency of heavy storms, of the sort that produce flash flooding, washed-out crop fields, costly structural damage and risk to human life and health. The latest example: an Aug. 27-28 storm so severe that it destroyed a scenic waterfall in Hokah, in far southeastern Minnesota.

To the credit of state lawmakers, state assistance when such storms strike is not in doubt. The 2014 Legislature and Gov. Mark Dayton established a contingency account that the governor can tap to pay the state's share of recovery costs when storm damage exceeds requisite thresholds.

Local and regional governments have also been planning for a wetter Minnesota. The Metropolitan Council's Climate Vulnerability Assessment is an aid to local planning, and it has utility well beyond the Twin Cities area. The University of Minnesota hosts an annual climate adaptation conference for local officials and others charged with community responses to the changing climate; the next such meeting is set for Nov. 14.

These are commendable first steps at the start of what Minnesotans should see as a long journey that they cannot avoid taking. It's long past time to discard mistaken notions that climate change only matters to polar bears, penguins and seacoast dwellers. It matters here, too - and how Minnesotans respond will matter for years to come.
U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson told a group of Republican women last month that climate change is "bulls--," continuing the two-term senator's increasing tendency to criticize the scientific community's consensus on major issues.

"I don't know about you guys, but I think climate change is - as Lord Monckton said - bulls--," Johnson said, without actually speaking the second half of the expletive but mouthing it, and referring to British conservative climate change denier Lord Christopher Monckton. "By the way, it is."

CNN first reported Tuesday on Johnson's comments to the Republican Women of Greater Wisconsin Luncheon at Alioto's in Wauwatosa in early June.

"What are we doing here? Well, we're killing ourselves," Johnson, R-Oshkosh, continued. "It's a self-inflicted wound."

Johnson's statement conflicts with the current consensus among 97% of actively publishing climate scientists on climate change, who have concluded that climate-warming trends over the past century are "extremely likely" caused by human activities, according to a NASA climate change report.

President Joe Biden mocked Johnson for his comments during a stop in Crystal Lake, Illinois, on Wednesday.

Johnson has long expressed skepticism toward the notion that climate change is caused by human activities. When he was a candidate in 2010, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported that Johnson said extreme weather events were better explained by sunspots than carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.

"I absolutely do not believe in the science of man-caused climate change," Johnson said at the time. "It's not proven by any stretch of the imagination."

In a statement, Johnson said his comments were consistent, that he is "not a climate change denier," but also "not a climate change alarmist."

Johnson has voted to acknowledge that climate change is real. Johnson, along with U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Madison, during a 2015 debate on a Keystone XL Pipeline bill, voted to adopt a non-binding resolution stating: "It is the sense of the Senate that climate change is real and not a hoax."

"Climate is not static," Johnson said in a statement. "It has always changed and always will change. I do not share Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez's view that the 'world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change.' Or President Biden saying the 'greatest threat' to U.S. security is climate change. I consider those to be extreme positions - to say the least."

Democrats panned Johnson's position on climate change.

"Yet again Ron Johnson has been caught ignoring the best interests of Wisconsinites, this time in regards to the very real economic and national security threat posed by climate change, in order to further his own political agenda," said Democratic Party of Wisconsin spokesperson Philip Shulman.

Johnson's latest statement on climate change follows a pattern of skepticism toward the vast majority of the medical and scientific community's views on certain issues, most notably COVID-19.

Johnson has given a platform to doctors who promoted unproven alternative treatments to COVID-19 that haven't been accepted by the broader medical community.

He also recently held a media event for people to discuss adverse reactions they or their family members experienced after receiving a coronavirus vaccine. Before the event, Johnson wasn't able to confirm whether the vaccines actually caused those adverse events, which do occur but are rare.

Johnson hasn't yet announced whether he'll seek reelection in 2022, but already, several Democratic candidates have announced bids for his seat.

In a recent television interview, President Trump made the claim that climate scientists who conclude that climate change is a result of human influence on the atmosphere have a "very big political agenda."

The president went on to state, in reference to the rapid melting of ice in Greenland, that "you don't know whether or not that would have happened with or without man. You don't know."

The American Meteorological Society (AMS), the nation's leading scientific society in the field, politely but unequivocally pushed back on his assertion.

Drawing upon its official position on climate change, issued in 2012, AMS Executive Director Keith Seitter reiterated the society's consensus view that "the dominant cause of the rapid change in climate of the past half-century is human-induced increases in the amount of atmospheric greenhouse gases."

Seitter went on to cite multiple lines of evidence to support this conclusion and noted "each of these lines of evidence has undergone rigorous testing and has overcome all credible challenges. They reinforce one another and there are no contradictory lines of evidence that withstand scientific scrutiny."

He went on to express the society's desire to contribute to our nation's response to this looming threat, the urgency of which was heightened by a United Nations report issued Oct. 8.

"The American Meteorological Society stands ready to provide assistance in connecting executive branch staff with that knowledge and expertise to ensure that you and your staff are working with credible and scientifically validated information as you navigate the many difficult policy areas impacted by the Earth's changing climate," Seitter told the White House.
Recently on the KDTH Voices of Dubuque show Cindy Kohlmann had as a guest one Steve Goreham with the Climate Science Coalition of America. When he began spouting misinformation both about electric vehicles and global warming, I knew something was up so I did a little digging.

The coalition Mr. Goreham is affiliated with, the Heartland Institute, which is a conservative/libertarian organization and one of the primary organizations pushing climate change skepticism. This is an organization that complained that the church's focus on climate change was paganism infesting the church. The coalition has no interest in fighting climate changes but instead in maintaining the status quo when it comes to energy production as the planet faces the catastrophic consequences of global warming. (Like the heat wave out west or the flash floods KDTH had reported on just before).

Plus, this is a guy who probably never sat in an electric vehicle in his life, knows next to nothing about them, and just rattles off the oil, gas and coal lobby talking points on command.

While it would be great if Ms. Kohlmann invited actual climate experts on to discuss climate or those who are knowledgeable about electric vehicles, I doubt that would happen. Having Mr. Goreham on to spout disinformation has left a sour taste in my mouth about KDTH and Radio Dubuque and it will be coming off my favorites on my new 2022 Chevy Bolt for now.
President Donald Trump's nominee to lead the Environmental Protection Agency on Wednesday called climate change "a huge issue" but not the "greatest crisis" and drew fire from Democrats at his confirmation hearing over the regulatory rollbacks he's made in six months as the agency's acting administrator.

Republicans on the GOP-majority Senate Environment and Public Works Committee mostly had praise for Andrew Wheeler, who has served as the agency's acting head since Scott Pruitt's resignation in July amid ethics scandals. The committee chairman, Sen. John Barrasso, R-Wyo., called Wheeler "very well-qualified" to take the job.

But Democrats pressed Wheeler about his work as a lobbyist helping an influential coal magnate meet with Trump administration officials before his nomination to the EPA and his moves on deregulation and on what they said was his inattention to the growing dangers of climate change.

"You seem to be consistently doing things that undermine the health and safety of this nation," Sen. Ed Markey, D-Mass., told Wheeler.

Markey asked him why he was pulling back on regulations that proponents say protect human health and the environment.

"I believe we are moving forward" on protections, Wheeler responded.

Wheeler cited changes he had initiated to roll back future mileage standards for cars and autos and to ease Obama-era clampdowns on dirtier-burning coal-fired power plants.

He said EPA staff, whom he did not identify, had concluded that those rollbacks would ultimately lead to health gains. Environmental groups and formal assessments from the EPA and other agencies have contested that, saying the changes would increase pollution and increase harm to people and the climate.

Sen. Tom Carper, D-Del., said the rollbacks in car mileage standards and toxic mercury emissions under Wheeler were examples of unsafe deregulation and went beyond what industries themselves wanted.

Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., noted Wheeler had failed to mention climate change in his initial remarks to lawmakers.

"Do you agree that climate change is a global crisis?" Sanders asked, shouting at times.

"I would not call it the greatest crisis," Wheeler said. "I would call it a huge issue that has to be addressed globally."

Wheeler told lawmakers that he had yet to read a massive government climate change report released late last year that emphasized man-made climate change was already underway.

Wheeler said he had received one staff briefing so far on the climate change report. The work of the EPA and other government agencies, the report stresses the massive economic toll expected from increasingly severe wildfires, hurricanes and other extreme weather under climate change.

Wheeler said the news media had seized upon "worst-case scenarios" of the report.

"You are a former coal industry lobbyist that is sitting here," Markey responded. "That's the worst-case scenario.

Sen. Joni Ernst, of Iowa,praised Wheeler for a move to remove federal regulations for millions of miles of wetlands and waterways. Republican lawmakers said the rules had burdened farmers and others.

The grandson of a coal miner, Wheeler worked for the EPA in the 1990s and later as a longtime Republican Senate staffer.

Democrats pressed Wheeler about his lobbying before joining the EPA, saying his work for coal companies should disqualify him from leading an agency that regulates coal.

Wheeler's lobbying clients included coal magnate Bob Murray, who pushed hard on the Trump administration after the 2016 elections to grant a series of breaks for the sagging domestic coal industry.

Wheeler accompanied Murray to a March 2017 meeting to pitch Murray's list of desired rule rollbacks and other breaks for coal to Energy Secretary Rick Perry.

Wheeler told senators that his main work for Murray had been on health benefits and pensions.

"I did not work on the plan. I do not have a copy of it. I saw it briefly," Wheeler said, referring to Murray's wish list.

Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, D-R.I., displayed a blown-up version of a photo taken of the meeting with Perry, showing Wheeler at Murray's side.

A second photo showed Murray's rollback plan in Wheeler's hands.

Murray had sought some of the coal breaks that the EPA under Wheeler has since acted on. That included Wheeler signing a rule easing federal regulation of toxic coal ash, redoing an Obama rule that pushed electricity providers to move away from dirtier-burning coal plants and targeting an Obama rule limiting emissions of toxic mercury from coal plants.

A watchdog group, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington, filed an ethics complaint Tuesday with the EPA's Office of the Inspector General alleging that Wheeler's oversight of those and other rollback proposals at EPA may have violated his government ethics pledge to abstain from regulatory decisions affecting his former lobbying client for at least two years.

EPA spokesman John Konkus called the accusation "baseless" and "wrong" and said Wheeler works with EPA ethics officials and follows their guidance.
Some people eagerly respond to impassioned statements about climate change, such as British Prime Minister Gordon Brown's warning that we cannot compromise with Earth. Others appreciate stunts - for example, a recent Maldives cabinet meeting that convened under water to signal worries about climate change. To me, though, nothing resonates more than the evidence, the simple, straightforward facts.

At a bipartisan gathering here - hosted by Sen. John Kerry, DMass., and Kenneth M. Duberstein, former White House chief of staff for the Reagan administration - I listened to an intense discussion. Vice Admiral (Ret.) Lee Gunn, the president of the American Security Project, gave the primary presentation. His institute, a bipartisan undertaking, is dedicated to studying and providing recommendations to resolve key U.S. global challenges. It has produced a new report, "Climate Security Index," which can be found at www.american securityproject.org.

A 35-year veteran of the U.S. Navy, Gunn understands better than most the threats facing the United States. In this particular context, he was most concerned about an insufficiently discussed connection - the one between climate change and national security. It is fairly easy, unless one is a perennial skeptic, to recognize the immediate, tangible aspects of climate change, such as unusually severe storms, droughts and sea-level rises. Even more disturbing, however, is the next level of problems, which will produce increasingly evident security complications in the near future.

Perhaps at the top of the list is that climate change will force unprecedented migration as people spread out in search of food, water, shelter and livelihoods. They will not pause at political borders. Inevitably, tensions and clashes will ensue. Even if those displaced individuals remain within a given country, they will prompt domestic conflict and exert tremendous pressure on their government. Should the government be weak, as is the case in failing states, the moment of disastrous destiny will draw closer, leading to both instability and an opening for terrorists and other extremists. Tropical diseases are also on the move in this tumultuous setting, taking advantage of changing weather and temperatures. In addition, both commercial and U.S. military investments in facilities at coastal areas will come under assault. At some point, costly relocations will be required. The list goes on.

Only on three occasions in my lifetime have I perceived dangers so dire they posed an existential challenge to society as we know it. The first - the Soviet juggernaut of the 20th century - smothered itself in a heap of mismanaged superpower overextension. The second - a wave of terrorism starting in the late 1970s - still menaces, but can be substantially controlled with a persistent, systematic strategy that thwarts the perpetrators and addresses the roots of the problem. The third - climate change - preoccupies me more than the other two combined. Indeed, it stands as the single, worst threat humanity faces. If we manage to reduce its effects, we have a chance to live and thrive. If we ignore it, we doom ourselves to the death, destruction and other ravages current trends portend.

A degree in rocket science is not required to understand such dangers. Nor are the solutions beyond grasp - if we act with reasonable haste."Climate Security Index" makes useful recommendations, such as reducing U.S. carbon emissions and persuading others to do the same; becoming more efficient across our entire economy; and expanding investment in renewable energy technologies.

The evidence on climate change, the simple, straightforward facts, is sobering. Americans should join the discussion and actively encourage serious solutions - before it is too late.
It's summer and so most likely no one is surprised that heat indexes have hit the triple digits recently.

For obvious reasons, this is likely to continue.

Geary County Extension Agent Chuck Otte said its hard to predict what the rest of the summer will be like, but that the climate predication center had projected higher-than-average temperatures for the next several months.

So far, with the exception of recent rain, June has been dry as well and will likely be hotter than normal, he said.

"That's not a surprise," Otte said.

People and livestock can adapt to these less-than-ideal temperatures by slowing down and drinking more water, he said.

Otte said what concerned him most was the lack of rain through most of June.

"When you go from well-above-normal to zero, it's hard on crops," he said. "Crops are showing stress right now. Pasture growth is starting to slow down, so that means producers may have to reduce the number of cattle in pastures ... Heat is in some aspects easier to adapt to than drought. So that's a concern. But we've had a couple of fairly mild summers, so yeah we're probably due for a warmer-than-normal summer."

Otte suggests people just adapt to the heat as best they can. Drink water, wear sunscreen, hats and lightweight long-sleeved shirts, and stay indoors during the day — from about noon until about 7 p.m. — when possible. Exercise either late in the evening or early in the morning, he said. Otte also recommends reducing electrical usage in the late afternoon starting around 4 p.m. until 8 p.m. to avoid straining the electrical system — and their monthly utility bills.

"Delay running dish washers, delay running clothes dryers or washing machines," he said. "Delay as much as possible until overnight hours — later in the evening, first thing in the morning when the air conditioning electrical demands are just so much less."

It's going to stay hot outside.

"We're at the maximum-day-length time of the year," he said. "The sun is the highest in the sky that it's going to be. It's the most direct that it's going to be. So it's an intense sun right now."

Because the summer solstice — which took place June 20 — has passed, the days have begun to shorten in length.

"In another two months, it will be great but for right now it's going to be hot and people just need to adjust," Otte said. "I think sometimes because of our air conditioning — our air conditioned cars, air conditioned homes, air conditioned workplaces — for a lot of people we view the heat as a cruel injustice when it's part of the natural cycle. Adjust, adapt, move on."

Some people may be tempted to attribute the high heat indexes to global warming just as some others like to use cold temperatures in winter to claim climate change doesn't exist.

However, Otte said this is not accurate to the science.

"Any individual period of days are not a reflection of global warming," he said. "But when you look at 30 year averages and see that for — here locally for the stuff that I keep track of — nighttime lows, we may have a month that is below-average temperature but the average overnight low is still above the 30-year average. That's one of the signs of (climate change). Yeah, we're definitely having climate change. The weather is definitely getting warmer. People will go back to the cold spell in February. Well yeah, that's not a surprise. Because warm air was actually displacing a lot of the polar air that came down here. So you can't look at any short period of time — meaning a week, a month — and say 'well, this shows that we do or we don't have global warming.' You've got to look at long time periods and moving averages and you can see that, yes, the climate is warming. I don't think there can be any debate about that. Now, we can debate all day how much humans have influenced it, but the numbers are pretty hard and fast — it is getting warmer on this planet."
A sobering recent study in the journal Science predicts today's children will experience two to seven times as many climate disasters as their grandparents did unless society changes its ways. If that sounds alarmist, consider that scientists have been remarkably prescient about global warming in the past. That's worth remembering when assessing these dire predictions.

The mechanics of climate change aren't mysterious: Greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide trap the sun's heat, raising global temperatures. Those gases, produced by human activity like the burning of fossil fuels, have filled the atmosphere at unprecedented levels in the past half-century.

The correlation between rising greenhouse-gas levels and rising average global temperatures is unmistakable today. But scientists predicted it well before it was obvious.

"It is shown that the anthropogenic carbon dioxide warming should emerge from the noise level of natural climate variability by the end of the century," predicted a landmark 1981 study, also from the journal Science. "Potential effects on climate in the 21st century include the creation of drought-prone regions in North America and central Asia as part of a shifting of climatic zones, erosion of the West Antarctic ice sheet with a consequent worldwide rise in sea level, and opening of the fabled Northwest Passage" in the Arctic.

Forty years later, every single one of those predictions has come to pass.

The same 1981 paper predicted that "political and economic forces" make it "unlikely" that society would change its approach to energy "until convincing observations of the global warming are in hand." From California's unprecedented wildfires to more frequent and severe hurricanes to the record global temperatures of the past decade, that moment is here.

In the more recent Science piece, entitled "Intergenerational inequities in exposure to climate extremes," researchers analyzed the societal effects of climate change today, then extrapolated the changes expected in the near future if human activity doesn't change. It provides stark comparisons between what past generations experienced and what awaits today's children.

A child born this year, the study predicts, will experience an average of twice as many wildfires, two to three times as many droughts, three times as many floods and seven times as many heat waves as a current 60-year-old person has experienced in his or her lifetime.

"It used to be … ‘Yeah we have to limit global warming because of grandchildren,'" Wim Thiery, lead author of the study, told The Washington Post. "This study is making clear that climate change has arrived. It's everywhere."

Had the U.S. and other societies heeded the science of a few decades ago, the world would not be facing such a heavy lift today. It's time to stop listening to the science-deniers and all the others who have consistently gotten it wrong, and start listening to those who have consistently gotten it right. The future of today's children depends upon it.
