Dozens of Lubbock citizens joined climate strikes being held around the world Friday to demand action against what they consider to be one of the biggest threats to the future.

The Global Climate Strikes have brought together thousands of teenagers in the hopes of getting serious climate legislation enacted during the United Nations Climate Action Summit on Monday.

Fawwaz Shoukfeh, Noura Shoukfeh, Hairuo Yi, and Vaidehi Patel, all students at Lubbock High School, organized a strike for their fellow classmates during sixth period by walking out.

"Many of the people making laws now won't have to live with the effects of them in 40, 50, 60 years," said Fawwaz. "We will, and thus, we feel the need to voice our opinions so that the world of the future is suitable for the inhabitants of the future."

Organizers said the strike had more attendees than expected, as about 120 students joined Fawwaz and the others in the movement. Fawwaz said they are aware of the power they have as students and possibly future leaders, and they're hoping to inspire positive action from others in West Texas.

"There's this idea that not many people from Lubbock or the greater West Texas area believe in global warming or climate change," said Fawwaz. "The purpose of our strike is to tell people that we do believe in climate change and we do want to see the way we treat our Earth change."

Among the changes they would like to see are a decline of fossil fuels as a source of energy and more renewable and sustainable sources, legislation and resolutions that encourage businesses to be more climate-conscious, assistance in developing Third World countries without high carbon emission levels, and for the United States to lead the way to change.

"We'd love to see the United States use its diplomatic sway to push and lead other countries in the climate revolution," Fawwaz said.

Lubbock citizen Nathan Lewis organized another strike at the Tim Cole Memorial Park in the afternoon, saying he was inspired by Swedish teenager and climate activist Greta Thunberg and has spoken with others who are as concerned as he is.

"Everybody I've talked to is really concerned about climate change and how we need to move now and get politicians to listen," Lewis said. "Almost all climate scientists agree and have been saying it for 30-40 years, and we've just been dragging our feet, but it's now or never."

Ironically, the start of the strike was plagued by heavy rains that hit Lubbock mid-afternoon. Despite being drenched, supporters stood outside until the storm cleared.

"A lot of people stuck it out, which shows the dedication for this event," said Abe Behr, a strike participant. "I came out here to spread the word that climate change is here and it's happening, and it's solvable and affects everybody regardless of their political orientation, race, or religion."

Behr said the demonstrations around the world show how large a problem climate change is, but that he's hopeful since there has been so much enthusiasm with the Global Climate Strike.

"I wanted to show there are people in West Texas who care passionately about this issue, and we should because we're going to be hit harder than a lot of areas," said Behr. "We have a lot to lose here."