Several aspects of the response to the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report issued Friday are more than a little curious.

Environmental activists criticized a report that claims "unequivocally that the world is warming due to human activities." Why? Because the report estimates that warming may cause the sea level to rise as much as 12 inches during the next century, while the group's 2001 report estimated it could rise by as much as three feet. This "too optimistic" estimate could dampen support for drastic policy measures to curb greenhouse gases, the activists fear.

This hankering for predictions of utter catastrophe is curious, but very much a feature of our age.

Some fundamentalist Christians spend a great deal of energy searching the news for signs and portents that we are living in the End Times that they believe are predicted in the prophetic books of the Bible.

Some people are sure that George W. Bush will suspend elections, put dissenters in concentration camps and rule as a dictator. Others talk as if they believe that, unless we stay the course in Iraq, a totalitarian Caliphate dominated by terrorists will rule the world in a few years. And some fundamentalist environmentalists almost revel in the belief that doomsday is upon us unless we repent of our evil carbon-burning ways and return to the True Path.

It's tough to shake the faith of true believers, but a calmer approach to climate change -- one quite consistent with the findings of the most recent IPCC report (which is not Holy Writ, but an effort to summarize the most recent research) -- is a better approach.

The IPCC report repeats what most scientists, including those who disagree about the extent to which human-produced carbon dioxide is the major cause, acknowledge. Since 1975, the earth has been warming at a rate of about 0.18 degrees Centigrade per decade. The IPCC report expects this to continue during the next century -- regardless of how much people control pollution. That would mean an increase of 1.8 degrees Centigrade (3.2 degrees Fahrenheit) by 2100. The upper end of the IPCC estimate is an increase of about 3 degrees Centigrade.

Physicist Fred Singer, author of the new book, "Hot Talk, Cold Science," believes this is consistent with a long-term pattern of warming every 1500 years, with industrial activity playing only a small role. But, whatever the reason, the planet seems to be getting warmer.

Such a temperature increase would mean a different world than we live in today, but not the end of the world. We will have to adapt. In some parts of the world, it will mean improved fertility, better food production and a greener landscape, while some places that are now deserts could become even less inhabitable.

Rather than embracing panic, symbolic mandates or expensive programs that offer little or no amelioration of warming at great cost (can you spell ethanol?), the best approach is to encourage economic growth that will create resources to invest in better technology and knowledge that will allow people to adapt.