On January 10, 1901, Spindle top gushed forth near Beaumont, ushering in the age of oil. An unholy amount of money blanketed Texas, materializing in pocketbooks as if manifested by God. Then, 119 years and four days later, Todd Staples, the president of the Texas Oil and Gas Association, a trade organization for several thousand firms associated with the state's fossil fuel industries, got on the phone to take questions from the media about the group's periodic efforts to keep that money flowing-specifically, its plans for the 2020 election. Things took an unexpected turn.
A reporter pointed out that the midterms, in 2018, saw a surge in young voters, who are much more likely than older folks to say they want the government to take action on climate change. Did that concern TXOGAP Staples responded that the organization considered itself an ally of those voters. "The oil and natural gas industry is absolutely committed to climate progress," he said, "and we want to help get the message out that no one is investing more in low-carbon technology. Every voter needs to know we share a common goal of a lower-emissions future."
It was a pretty milquetoast statement but a remarkable one coming from Staples. A staunch Republican and former Texas agriculture commissioner, Staples spent his time in office attacking proposals to address climate change and once urged the U.S. Department of Agriculture to fire all its "treasonous" employees involved in promoting "Meatless Monday," an international climate-conscious campaign to eat vegetarian once a week. In 2010 Staples joined Governor Rick Perry and Attorney General Greg Abbott to promote the state's lawsuits against the Obama-era Environmental Protection Agency as it attempted to curb the nation's carbon emissions, and all three sowed confusion about climate science in the process.
The idea that limiting greenhouse gases would be good, which Staples was endorsing, implies that emissions are in some way bad or have negative consequences, a concession with sweeping implications for TXOGA members, not to mention the broader Texas economy. If emitting carbon at current levels is harmful, then it follows, even from a conservative perspective, that the state ought to curb carbon, at least when practical. Was the mouthpiece of Texas Oil calling, indirectly, for a crackdown on the flaring of natural gas or for limits on methane emissions from leaky pipelines? For an end to the massive state and federal subsidies for fossil fuels? Or even for electric cars, solar farms, and nuclear power? Was Staples playing the role of Mikhail Gorbachev, and was this his glasnost (or, ahem, his gasnost)?
Staples took another question: Did TXOGA agree that burning oil and gas contributed to climate change? "We believe that all emissions contribute to climate change, and we believe that our industry is committed to doing our part," Staples said. "Every emission, wood that's burned, there's carbon emissions from multiple sources, and to have a real conversation, we need to look at all sources."
The suggestion that a family in, say, Burundi, with a wood-burning stove is a coequal culprit in the warming of the planet is an indication that Staples was not exactly channeling Greta Thunberg. But the timing was itself telling. He spoke as unprecedented wildfires ravaged vast swaths of Australia, a leading exporter of coal, putting pressure on Australia's conservative prime minister to acknowledge the country's significant carbon output, even as he said he would protect the coal industry. In the United States, there are other signs of a thawing of hard-line messaging on climate change, even during the rule of an administration steadfastly opposed to doing anything about the problem. The American Petroleum Institute, the national counterpart to TXOGA, recently started referring more to the "natural gas and oil" industry, instead of "oil and gas," emphasizing the more climate-friendly fuel, at least if produced and transported appropriately.
About a week after Staples's concession, at an event hosted by the conservative Texas Public Policy Foundation, Texas congressman Dan Crenshaw, a 36-year-old former Navy SEAL who has positioned himself as the face of millennial conservatism, introduced a small disturbance in the force by telling the audience that Republicans needed to start taking environmental issues, including climate change, seriously. Crenshaw noted that the environment regularly ranked as a top concern for Democrats, Republicans, and independents alike. "We can make fun of the left's sort of alarmist views on climate change, and we should, to an extent, but we can't ignore it completely," he said, because they were "not totally untrue." Crenshaw said the GOP should emphasize that climate change could be solved by "innovation, research, and development," which is more politically palatable to voters than asking them to give up steaks and pickup trucks.
Not a particularly radical sentiment: Crenshaw's suggestion is still to the "right" of virtually every major conservative party in the developed world. But again, you have to take into account the speaker and his audience. The Texas Public Policy Foundation has ties to fossil fuel interests, and in recent years it has spent generously on a campaign to hobble the thriving Texas wind-power industry while protecting the vast government subsidies that still flow to the oil, gas, and coal industries.
Around the same time that Crenshaw made his comments, Houston's elite businesspeople gathered for the annual meeting of the Greater Houston Partnership, the powerful business association at the heart of the oil-driven city. In almost any other context, Chair Bobby Tudor's message to the audience of oil and gas types would have been seen as an invocation of conventional wisdom, but here it was brave, or at least bold: "A consensus has emerged among scientists, business leaders, and the general public that climate change is a real problem that requires urgent attention from all of us, and that we therefore will be using less hydrocarbon-based energy sources."
The industry was "dramatically out of favor at the moment, in most every corner of the investing and political world," he said, and it needed urgently to adapt. "At its most basic level, I think we can all agree that having less CO2 emissions in the atmosphere would be a good thing-and as Houston's business leaders, we need to be committed to working to make that happen."
For skeptics inclined to think the change in rhetoric was just a PR move, Staples for one was ready to oblige. Two days after his call with reporters, he went on the public radio show the Texas Standard to clean up his spill. It seemed as if he had intended to signal a change in messaging but was surprised by how seriously everyone had taken it. "I think the term 'climate change' has been hijacked. I think it's been used to unfortunately introduce climate hysteria or climate confusion. I think the term is used in such a way to confuse the public that the sky is falling in," he said.
Much of the industry reacted to Staples's message-and his subsequent walkback-with a shrug. But some were angry. "Unfortunately, many of these large companies feel the need to apologize rather than stepping up and talking about the dramatic impact cheap, reliable energy has made on our standard of living," said Kathy Shannon, the executive director of the Permian Basin Petroleum Museum, in Midland. The right-wing advocacy organization Texas Scorecard accused Staples of "jumping on the liberal bandwagon." One conservative blogger wrote that "one can only assume that Staples is now a non-climate-denier in order to reach future political heights," perhaps mollifying the left in advance of a new political run. "He's prepping as a Beto clone."
Of course, there's something a little ridiculous about parsing statements from oil and gas trade groups at a time when Australia and the Amazon are burning. There's a kind of recurrent amnesia that paints climate change as a perennially "new" problem, an issue that is just reaching critical mass of awareness.
It's shocking today to reflect on just how much we've known all along and how much we've decided to ignore. Since at least the early 1800s, scientists have been aware of the greenhouse gas effect. In 1856 scientist Eunice Foote established that carbon dioxide was remarkably efficient at trapping infrared heat, like that from the sun, and theorized that a carbon-saturated atmosphere would spike the earth's temperature. By the 1890s, in the years before Spindletop, researchers had moved on to the question of how fast carbon emissions would heat the earth.
And it's not as if this scientific knowledge was a secret either. In the 1950s, a short educational film directed by Frank Capra in a cheery midcentury style and screened at schools across the country showed a scientist predicting that thanks to the "waste products of civilization," future tourists would possibly one day board "glass-bottom boats" to get a glimpse of "the drowned towers of Miami." Political leaders were also aware of the problem. In the 1980s, politicians as conservative as George H.W. Bush and Margaret Thatcher warned of the urgent threat posed by climate change. As recently as 2008, the presidential candidates of both parties had sweeping plans to rein in carbon emissions. These periods of awareness come and go.
When pressure builds, the industries with the biggest carbon footprints adopt new messaging, and then the pressure dissipates, and life, and heating, goes on. While Staples's announcement is significant, it also fits neatly into that unfortunate pattern. Which is especially galling, because the industry he represents has known what's going on for years. Thanks to dogged reporting by Inside Climate News and the Los Angeles Times, we know that as early as 1977, Texas oil giant Exxon, a prominent member of TXOGA, was not only producing its own scientific climate models that calculated future warming trends but also using that knowledge to plan its long-term investments. The next year, Exxon's chief scientist warned internally that "present thinking holds that man has a time window of five to ten years before the need for hard decisions regarding changes in energy strategies might become critical." Yet for decades more, the company funded campaigns to muddy the waters and forestall political action-decisions that have not only spawned a wave of lawsuits against Exxon but also transformed the very physical and chemical composition of the atmosphere.
In light of this history, it might seem as if nothing will ever change-at least not in time to stave off the grimmest future scenarios predicted by scientists. But that's too pessimistic a view. There are reasons for hope, and one of them comes from a most unexpected source: young Republicans.
Benji Backer is a clean-cut, wholesome-looking Wisconsin conservative who cut his teeth arguing with teachers in high school about Republican governor Scott Walker's fight with public unions. But now, at the age of 22, he's the president and founder of the American Conservation Coalition, which is trying to sell the Republican party on environmental issues. The group draws inspiration from the legacy of Teddy Roosevelt and Richard Nixon, who championed national parks and oversaw the creation of the EPA, respectively.
Backer knows something that both Staples and Crenshaw alluded to in their remarks: on climate change, young Republicans are closer to Democrats in many ways than older Republicans. A pivotal moment in Backer's political awakening came when he attended the Conservative Political Action Conference, at the time an important annual gathering of movement conservatives.
There, he connected with other young conservatives who, he learned, considered traditional social issues, like gay marriage, to be irrelevant. Instead, Backer says, the activists wanted to talk about climate change, "a number one issue throughout their entire lives."
Public opinion surveys bear this out. In October, the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas revealed a stark generational gap among Republicans on the issue of climate. Only 33 percent of Texas Republicans over forty said they thought climate change was happening, compared to a whopping 70 percent of those under forty. Of those young Republicans who believe it is happening, 61 percent said they're "very" or "somewhat" worried. Those under-forty Republicans are even more likely to be "very worried" about climate change than independents of all ages.
Such surveys may actually undersell generational differences. As one conservative pointed out to me, young Republicans over the age of thirty or so grew up during the culture wars of the 2000s and developed a distaste for environmentalists, exemplified by Al Gore and the South Park character "ManBearPig"-a cartoon reflection of the popular view that people who talked about climate change were smug, hypocritical weirdos. Young Republicans like Backer don't see things that way. Even within young Republican groups, Backer says, the gap between younger and older members can be cavernous.
The American Conservation Coalition, it should be said, is not influential, at least not yet. Other conservatives have mocked the group, and only a few elected officials have endorsed its mission, mostly Republicans from the Northeast and the Pacific Northwest. But Backer and his peers stress to other Republicans that climate policy can be a bridge to a younger generation that generally views the party with disdain. And they warn their elders that they'll be forced to align with Democrats if the GOP refuses to move on an issue some young Republicans feel is existential. "Republicans will keep losing the youth vote if they don't rethink this," Backer says.
Backer's group isn't alone. Students for Carbon Dividends is a confederation of College Republican clubs that supports the idea of imposing a price on carbon and returning the proceeds to Americans in the form of a tax rebate. Its founding coalition included College Republican and Young Conservative chapters at Texas Christian University, Trinity University in San Antonio, and the University of Houston.
Though the news media focuses on left-wing climate activists, these conservatives might have more of an influence on the climate debate, polarized as it is. But as they know, they're running out of time to make a mark.


Dozens of Lubbock citizens joined climate strikes being held around the world Friday to demand action against what they consider to be one of the biggest threats to the future.

The Global Climate Strikes have brought together thousands of teenagers in the hopes of getting serious climate legislation enacted during the United Nations Climate Action Summit on Monday.

Fawwaz Shoukfeh, Noura Shoukfeh, Hairuo Yi, and Vaidehi Patel, all students at Lubbock High School, organized a strike for their fellow classmates during sixth period by walking out.

"Many of the people making laws now won't have to live with the effects of them in 40, 50, 60 years," said Fawwaz. "We will, and thus, we feel the need to voice our opinions so that the world of the future is suitable for the inhabitants of the future."

Organizers said the strike had more attendees than expected, as about 120 students joined Fawwaz and the others in the movement. Fawwaz said they are aware of the power they have as students and possibly future leaders, and they're hoping to inspire positive action from others in West Texas.

"There's this idea that not many people from Lubbock or the greater West Texas area believe in global warming or climate change," said Fawwaz. "The purpose of our strike is to tell people that we do believe in climate change and we do want to see the way we treat our Earth change."

Among the changes they would like to see are a decline of fossil fuels as a source of energy and more renewable and sustainable sources, legislation and resolutions that encourage businesses to be more climate-conscious, assistance in developing Third World countries without high carbon emission levels, and for the United States to lead the way to change.

"We'd love to see the United States use its diplomatic sway to push and lead other countries in the climate revolution," Fawwaz said.

Lubbock citizen Nathan Lewis organized another strike at the Tim Cole Memorial Park in the afternoon, saying he was inspired by Swedish teenager and climate activist Greta Thunberg and has spoken with others who are as concerned as he is.

"Everybody I've talked to is really concerned about climate change and how we need to move now and get politicians to listen," Lewis said. "Almost all climate scientists agree and have been saying it for 30-40 years, and we've just been dragging our feet, but it's now or never."

Ironically, the start of the strike was plagued by heavy rains that hit Lubbock mid-afternoon. Despite being drenched, supporters stood outside until the storm cleared.

"A lot of people stuck it out, which shows the dedication for this event," said Abe Behr, a strike participant. "I came out here to spread the word that climate change is here and it's happening, and it's solvable and affects everybody regardless of their political orientation, race, or religion."

Behr said the demonstrations around the world show how large a problem climate change is, but that he's hopeful since there has been so much enthusiasm with the Global Climate Strike.

"I wanted to show there are people in West Texas who care passionately about this issue, and we should because we're going to be hit harder than a lot of areas," said Behr. "We have a lot to lose here."


This Earth Day brings renewed awareness to many people about our presence on the planet. After several years of widespread panic about our impact on the earth, things calmed down a bit. Recent polls have found that the environment has slipped down the list of public concerns. Of greater importance are more immediate matters, such as the economy and public safety.

President Obama is still working to mandate earth-friendly behavior including cap-and-trade legislation and "green energy" funding. Even some Rio Grande Valley cities are using the idea of climate change to impose more restrictions on individual freedom, from forced recycling efforts that currently cost rather than save taxpayers money, to outright bans on plastic bags and other common items. But those measures aren't being well received.

Disclosures that much global warming data were skewed or even fabricated certainly didn't help matters. It turns out that even as industrial development in China, South Korea and other Asian countries has caused greenhouse gas emissions to soar over the past decade, the earth as a whole hasn't gotten any warmer. It's actually gotten cooler, according to information gathered by the BBC last year. Much of the United States endured one of the coldest winters on record this year.

Growing numbers of scientists have been jumping off the global-warming bandwagon lately. The Kansas City Star recently reported that in a survey of 121 meteorologists, 62 percent said the climate models used to predict global warming data and sea levels were unreliable. Twenty-nine percent of those polled said the global warming scare was a scam.

Meteorologists generally don't have any incentive to tell government officials what they want to hear in order to get grant money. They also know how difficult it is to forecast daily rain and temperature; long-term climate change is even less predictable.

Joseph D'Aleo, who cofounded The Weather Channel, told the Star that television and radio networks had asked forecasters not to voice skepticism of climate change, because they could draw more advertising money by promoting environmentalism.

The truth is that while some parts of the globe are warmer one year compared to the previous one, other parts are colder. An even bigger truth is that we will never know exactly what the earth has in store for us.

Certainly, doing as little damage to our habitat is the best policy. But on this 40th Earth Day, we should strive to enact policies based on accurate, objective information about the world around us.

Perhaps the most rational comments about our impact on the earth came from the late comedian George Carlin:

"Saving endangered species is just one more arrogant attempt by humans to control nature. And the greatest arrogance of all: save the planet. We don't even know how to take care of ourselves yet. ...

"We have the conceit to think that somehow we're a threat, that somehow we're going to put in jeopardy this beautiful little blue-green ball that's floating around the sun? ...

"The earth has been through a lot worse than us. Earthquakes, volcanoes, ... hundreds of thousands of years of bombardment by comets, asteroids and meteors, ... and we think some plastic bags and some aluminum cans are going to make a difference?

"The planet isn't going anywhere -- we are. The planet will be here and we'll be long gone. The planet will shake us off like a bad case of fleas. ...

"You want to know how the planet's doing? Ask those people at Pompeii, who are frozen into position from volcanic ash. Ask those people ... buried under thousands of tons of earthquake rubble if they feel like a threat to the planet this week. ...

"The planet will be here long after we're gone, and it will heal itself; it will cleanse itself, because it's a self-correcting system."


Several aspects of the response to the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report issued Friday are more than a little curious.

Environmental activists criticized a report that claims "unequivocally that the world is warming due to human activities." Why? Because the report estimates that warming may cause the sea level to rise as much as 12 inches during the next century, while the group's 2001 report estimated it could rise by as much as three feet. This "too optimistic" estimate could dampen support for drastic policy measures to curb greenhouse gases, the activists fear.

This hankering for predictions of utter catastrophe is curious, but very much a feature of our age.

Some fundamentalist Christians spend a great deal of energy searching the news for signs and portents that we are living in the End Times that they believe are predicted in the prophetic books of the Bible.

Some people are sure that George W. Bush will suspend elections, put dissenters in concentration camps and rule as a dictator. Others talk as if they believe that, unless we stay the course in Iraq, a totalitarian Caliphate dominated by terrorists will rule the world in a few years. And some fundamentalist environmentalists almost revel in the belief that doomsday is upon us unless we repent of our evil carbon-burning ways and return to the True Path.

It's tough to shake the faith of true believers, but a calmer approach to climate change -- one quite consistent with the findings of the most recent IPCC report (which is not Holy Writ, but an effort to summarize the most recent research) -- is a better approach.

The IPCC report repeats what most scientists, including those who disagree about the extent to which human-produced carbon dioxide is the major cause, acknowledge. Since 1975, the earth has been warming at a rate of about 0.18 degrees Centigrade per decade. The IPCC report expects this to continue during the next century -- regardless of how much people control pollution. That would mean an increase of 1.8 degrees Centigrade (3.2 degrees Fahrenheit) by 2100. The upper end of the IPCC estimate is an increase of about 3 degrees Centigrade.

Physicist Fred Singer, author of the new book, "Hot Talk, Cold Science," believes this is consistent with a long-term pattern of warming every 1500 years, with industrial activity playing only a small role. But, whatever the reason, the planet seems to be getting warmer.

Such a temperature increase would mean a different world than we live in today, but not the end of the world. We will have to adapt. In some parts of the world, it will mean improved fertility, better food production and a greener landscape, while some places that are now deserts could become even less inhabitable.

Rather than embracing panic, symbolic mandates or expensive programs that offer little or no amelioration of warming at great cost (can you spell ethanol?), the best approach is to encourage economic growth that will create resources to invest in better technology and knowledge that will allow people to adapt.


According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) the decade of 2000-09 was the warmest on record worldwide; the previous warmest decade was the 1990s.

Also known as global warming, climate change has drawn widespread concern in recent years as temperatures around the world rise, threatening to harm crops, spread disease, increase sea levels, change storm and drought patterns and cause polar melting.

The Obama administration lofted a proposal to establish within NOAA -- an arm of the Department of Commerce -- a new Climate Service to collect and analyze climatic data being gathered worldwide. It would be, promises the administration, the definitive source for climate information.

NOAA Administrator, Dr Jane Lubchenco, in a NY Times interview stated, "Climate change is real, it's happening now." She said climate information is vital to the wind power industry, coastal community planning, fishermen and fishery managers, farmers and public health officials.

Lubchenco further stated, "We envision this climate portal as the first step toward making the wealth of climate information at NOAA available in one easy-to-use resource."

Creation of the Climate Service requires a series of steps, including layers of Congressional Committee approval.

Congress would be saddled with the responsibility of regulating safeguards to the highest standards of scientific integrity and transparency -- avoiding the type of controversies that have begged the question about the competency and scientific impartiality of much climate research.

An interesting speculation is that if the George W. Bush administration proposed the service, the suspicion would have been that it was to give a veneer of science to the administration's distaste for environmental regulation.

Conversely, others will say that the Obama administration wants similar cover for a greenhouse-gas bill with a cap-and-trade program for polluters.

Conservative media outlets have used recent winter storms throughout the east as an excuse to forward attacks against former Vice President Al Gore and climate science. Regardless, winter snow on the east coast of the United States does not disprove the scientific consensus that global warming is real.

While Washington DC is being pummeled by what the Washing Times referred to as "Snowmageddon", Rio de Janeiro is reportedly suffering through a "historic" heat wave.

Additionally, according to numerous news outlets, Vancouver, British Columbia, the location of the 2010 Winter Olympics has been hit by unseasonably warm weather, causing a massive effort to move snow to freestyle skiing events sites.

So while some are snowing on the global warming parade, it is necessary to distinguish between weather and climate. A short-term condition sometimes can run counter to a long-term trend.

It's not utterly misanthropic to see the effects of climate change on melting polar ice caps, raised sea levels, threatened crops and changing weather patterns.

A nonpartisan research agency is the clear path toward generating future solutions.