This Earth Day brings renewed awareness to many people about our presence on the planet. After several years of widespread panic about our impact on the earth, things calmed down a bit. Recent polls have found that the environment has slipped down the list of public concerns. Of greater importance are more immediate matters, such as the economy and public safety.

President Obama is still working to mandate earth-friendly behavior including cap-and-trade legislation and "green energy" funding. Even some Rio Grande Valley cities are using the idea of climate change to impose more restrictions on individual freedom, from forced recycling efforts that currently cost rather than save taxpayers money, to outright bans on plastic bags and other common items. But those measures aren't being well received.

Disclosures that much global warming data were skewed or even fabricated certainly didn't help matters. It turns out that even as industrial development in China, South Korea and other Asian countries has caused greenhouse gas emissions to soar over the past decade, the earth as a whole hasn't gotten any warmer. It's actually gotten cooler, according to information gathered by the BBC last year. Much of the United States endured one of the coldest winters on record this year.

Growing numbers of scientists have been jumping off the global-warming bandwagon lately. The Kansas City Star recently reported that in a survey of 121 meteorologists, 62 percent said the climate models used to predict global warming data and sea levels were unreliable. Twenty-nine percent of those polled said the global warming scare was a scam.

Meteorologists generally don't have any incentive to tell government officials what they want to hear in order to get grant money. They also know how difficult it is to forecast daily rain and temperature; long-term climate change is even less predictable.

Joseph D'Aleo, who cofounded The Weather Channel, told the Star that television and radio networks had asked forecasters not to voice skepticism of climate change, because they could draw more advertising money by promoting environmentalism.

The truth is that while some parts of the globe are warmer one year compared to the previous one, other parts are colder. An even bigger truth is that we will never know exactly what the earth has in store for us.

Certainly, doing as little damage to our habitat is the best policy. But on this 40th Earth Day, we should strive to enact policies based on accurate, objective information about the world around us.

Perhaps the most rational comments about our impact on the earth came from the late comedian George Carlin:

"Saving endangered species is just one more arrogant attempt by humans to control nature. And the greatest arrogance of all: save the planet. We don't even know how to take care of ourselves yet. ...

"We have the conceit to think that somehow we're a threat, that somehow we're going to put in jeopardy this beautiful little blue-green ball that's floating around the sun? ...

"The earth has been through a lot worse than us. Earthquakes, volcanoes, ... hundreds of thousands of years of bombardment by comets, asteroids and meteors, ... and we think some plastic bags and some aluminum cans are going to make a difference?

"The planet isn't going anywhere -- we are. The planet will be here and we'll be long gone. The planet will shake us off like a bad case of fleas. ...

"You want to know how the planet's doing? Ask those people at Pompeii, who are frozen into position from volcanic ash. Ask those people ... buried under thousands of tons of earthquake rubble if they feel like a threat to the planet this week. ...

"The planet will be here long after we're gone, and it will heal itself; it will cleanse itself, because it's a self-correcting system."