The New York Times makes a concerted effort to drive home the point 
that climate change is real, but it does a poor job of presenting the 
basic facts about climate change that could convince skeptics, according
to a review of the paper's coverage since 1980.
Public polls show that Americans, whether agreeing or disagreeing 
with the idea that human activity is changing Earth's climate, lack an 
understanding of the basic facts leading to this conclusion, says 
climate scientist David Romps, a University of California, Berkeley, 
professor of earth and planetary science. A large percentage of the 
public doesn't know that global warming is happening now, that it's 
caused by record levels of CO2 from fossil fuel burning, that 99% of 
climate scientists agree on this and that the changes are effectively 
permanent.
"If The New York Times isn't doing it, my guess is that it is just 
not happening across print journalism," Romps said. "One of the hopes is
that, by at least pointing this out, it might occur to people to take a
look at what kind of context is provided in news coverage of climate 
change."
Romps and co-author Jean Retzinger, the former associate director of
UC Berkeley's Media Studies program, published their analysis in the 
journal Environmental Research Communications.
After more than a decade of research focused on how climate change 
affects the atmosphere - in particular, clouds and lightning - Romps 
became frustrated about the public's lack of basic knowledge of the 
science that underlies the 99% consensus among climate scientists.
"The notion that there is a scientific consensus has been referred 
to as a gateway belief by people who study how the public thinks about 
climate change," Romps said. "They find that, if you can get people to 
understand that fact, it kind of pries the door open and makes them open
to learning more and potentially changing their minds."
Yet, as of 2019, the fact of a scientific consensus is mentioned in a
mere 4% of Times articles about climate change, he and Retzinger found.
The fact that we are experiencing levels of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere that haven't been seen in millions of years - and never 
before in human history - is mentioned in only 1% of the paper's 
articles.
And the fact that climate change is permanent is mentioned in only 0.4% of articles.
"We are talking about an alteration of the planet's climate, and in 
all of my conversations with people, no one has ever asked me how long 
it lasts," Romps said. "I don't understand how people can have any sort 
of opinion about global warming without knowing that fact: that it is 
effectively permanent. The time scale for drawing the CO2 anomaly back 
down to where it was 50 years ago is on the order of 100,000 years, 10 
times longer than human civilization. So it is, for all intents and 
purposes, permanent. And each additional increment of warming is 
effectively permanent."
Lack of facts sows confusion
A fourth climate-change fact he looked at - that CO2 produced by 
fossil fuel burning creates a greenhouse effect that warms the planet -
was mentioned in only 0.1% of the articles. Many people confuse the 
effects of carbon dioxide with the ozone hole, which is caused by 
chlorofluorocarbons used in refrigerators, or think that warming is due 
to the heat produced by burning oil and gas.
His data show that, in the 1980s, when the concept of global warming
was still new to many readers, the Times often referred to the 
mechanism of greenhouse warming and did so, in some years, in every 
article. But 20 years later, this mechanism is seldom mentioned, despite
a whole new generation of readers.
The only fact mentioned regularly - in nearly one-third of all 
articles - is that the effects of climate change are being felt now. 
But of the 600 news articles mentioning climate change over the 38-year 
period, the vast majority contained none of the five basic climate 
facts. This occurred despite the ease with which the basic facts of 
climate science were embedded in articles that did mention these facts.
"We have this major problem: that people don't seem to have a solid 
grasp of the fundamental ideas. And why would that be?" he asked. "There
has been a well-funded campaign to spread misinformation and sow doubt 
about global warming, which has been very successful. On the other hand,
climate scientists are not necessarily out there communicating 
effectively to the public."
"After you finish school, you learn about science primarily through 
the news," he added. "And if you are not getting appropriate context 
from that news coverage, you are going to be confused."
Romps is embarking on an experiment to try to change this, 
partnering with UC Berkeley's Graduate School of Journalism to offer 
fellowships to student environmental writers to discuss with climate 
scientists the basic facts about climate change and how best to convey 
them within news articles. If this proves effective in changing public 
understanding, it could open the door to a broader national discussion 
of climate change coverage in the media.
Paper of record
To assess whether the basic facts behind the scientific consensus 
about climate change are being communicated through the media, Romps and
Retzinger focused on perhaps the number one paper of record in the 
nation, the Times.
"We chose The New York Times because it certainly has this 
reputation of being excellent in covering environmental issues and 
climate change, and I personally think it's one of the best," he said. 
"At the same time, I had this feeling from having read stories on 
climate that they didn't convey the basic facts to readers, and that 
that might be a problem."
They enlisted the help of a dozen undergraduate students to review 
New York Times articles mentioning climate change that were published 
between 1980 and 2018, in search of the key words employed when 
mentioning five basic facts: the consensus, mechanism, longevity, 
magnitude and immediacy of climate change.
They then searched for all articles that included these key words, 
and Romps read each one to judge whether or not it mentioned these five 
facts.
"I don't think that everyone learning the basic facts I have 
outlined here is a solution in itself. But I do believe it is a 
necessary condition," he said. "We are not going to make the progress we
need until everyone from both political parties, from rural and urban 
areas, from all states, accept the fact that global warming is 
happening, it is caused by us, and that the solution is to stop burning 
fossil fuels. These are the basic facts that climate scientists know, 
policy wonks know, but somehow the broader public does not quite 
appreciate yet."
In addition to his efforts to better communicate the facts of 
climate change, Romps hopes to set an example for those wanting to 
reduce their carbon footprint. Last year, he refused to fly to an awards
presentation, and since January has not flown to any scientific 
meetings - a big drop from his typical yearly air mileage topping 
100,000 miles. He'd like to deliver scientific papers to colleagues via 
video streaming, but this is not yet an accepted practice at annual 
meetings.
Nevertheless, he is heartened by younger people speaking out, and he  supported the Sept. 20 worldwide climate strike.
"Being a climate scientist can be a fairly depressing occupation," 
Romps said. "But seeing young people stand up and make their voices 
heard is really quite encouraging. There is hope. The youth have been 
heeding the call, and we need grown-ups to start heeding the call, too."
