This has been a year marked by terrifying news about climate change: extreme weather, massive wildfires, persistent drought in some areas and catastrophic flooding in others.
The sense of impending doom was made official when the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warned that the world is almost certain to blow past the target set by the 2015 Paris Agreement of holding the increase in global temperature to 1.5 degrees Celsius above the 19th century level.
That was "a code red for humanity," U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres warned. "Global heating is affecting every region on Earth, with many of the changes becoming irreversible."
And yet, as improbable as it seems, there are glimmers of hope on the horizon.
Public opinion has moved, partly because more people now have firsthand experience with the effects of climate change. A poll sponsored by Yale and George Mason universities reported this month that a record 76% of Americans think global warming is real; only 12% think it isn't.
"Denialism," the dismissal of climate change as bogus, is dying.
An increasing number of Americans want their political leaders to do something about climate change. A Pew Research Center poll in May found that almost two-thirds say it should be treated as a top priority.
That's tempered by the fact that Americans rank plenty of other issues -- beginning with the economy and COVID-19 -- as "top priorities."
But among Democrats and young voters especially, climate has become a core issue. They want their government to act.
Political leaders follow the poll numbers. In Europe, climate is a serious priority for almost all major parties. In the United States, the issue is polarizing; many Republicans are still skeptical. But for Democrats like President Biden and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, acting against climate change has become a must-do.
Next month, many of those politicians, including Biden, will head to the Scottish city of Glasgow for a summit meeting. The purpose is to win new commitments for action -- especially from China, the industrial behemoth that burns more coal than the rest of the world combined.
The good news there is that China, which has long proclaimed its intention to clean up its energy sector someday, is increasingly a global outlier.
The International Energy Agency, which once championed fossil fuel industries, now says demand for oil, gas and coal could peak within a decade -- thanks mostly to the rise of solar, wind and other low-carbon technologies.
"There is increasing optimism in the climate and energy communities that [carbon dioxide] emissions have plateaued or are now plateauing," Dagomar Degroot, an environmental historian at Georgetown University, told me last week. "Scenarios that forecast soaring emissions now seem implausible."
That doesn't mean the problem is solving itself, he warned.
"Warming will continue until we release fewer emissions than can be absorbed. ... That threshold still seems to be decades away. We need to work harder to bring it closer."
But while there's not much optimism in the short term, the long-run goal of slowing and then reversing global warming no longer looks unreachable. The problem can be solved with tools we have: evolving technologies, efficiency and conservation.
The environmental movement's problem now, perversely, isn't denialism; it's "doomism," the view that the planet's collapse is inevitable, and efforts to prevent catastrophe are futile.
"Fear-based messaging" was once useful because it grabbed people's attention, but now it risks getting in the way, Katharine Hayhoe, chief scientist of the Nature Conservancy, told me. Her new book, "Saving Us," makes a case for hope.
Doomism "isn't helpful when it leads to inaction," she said. "We're not just tied to the railway track, where there's nothing we can do. We're in the locomotive with our hand on the throttle. We have the ability to take our hand off the throttle and put our foot on the brake.
"We can't avoid all the impacts, because some of them are here today. But we absolutely can avoid the worst impacts," Hayhoe added.
The next three decades will still be hard. The IPCC report described five possible scenarios for the rest of this century; even the most optimistic forecasts that temperatures will continue to rise through at least 2050. The five "best estimates" for the year 2100 were temperature increases ranging from 1.4 to 4.4 degrees Celsius.
The question for the politicians who are about to gather in Glasgow is: How much will they do to reduce those numbers? Which scenario do they want to bequeath to their successors -- and to their grandchildren?
But it's just possible that this decade could be remembered as one in which humans solved a collective problem and began to tame climate change. That, at least, provides grounds for hope.
The New York Times makes a concerted effort to drive home the point 
that climate change is real, but it does a poor job of presenting the 
basic facts about climate change that could convince skeptics, according
to a review of the paper's coverage since 1980.
Public polls show that Americans, whether agreeing or disagreeing 
with the idea that human activity is changing Earth's climate, lack an 
understanding of the basic facts leading to this conclusion, says 
climate scientist David Romps, a University of California, Berkeley, 
professor of earth and planetary science. A large percentage of the 
public doesn't know that global warming is happening now, that it's 
caused by record levels of CO2 from fossil fuel burning, that 99% of 
climate scientists agree on this and that the changes are effectively 
permanent.
"If The New York Times isn't doing it, my guess is that it is just 
not happening across print journalism," Romps said. "One of the hopes is
that, by at least pointing this out, it might occur to people to take a
look at what kind of context is provided in news coverage of climate 
change."
Romps and co-author Jean Retzinger, the former associate director of
UC Berkeley's Media Studies program, published their analysis in the 
journal Environmental Research Communications.
After more than a decade of research focused on how climate change 
affects the atmosphere - in particular, clouds and lightning - Romps 
became frustrated about the public's lack of basic knowledge of the 
science that underlies the 99% consensus among climate scientists.
"The notion that there is a scientific consensus has been referred 
to as a gateway belief by people who study how the public thinks about 
climate change," Romps said. "They find that, if you can get people to 
understand that fact, it kind of pries the door open and makes them open
to learning more and potentially changing their minds."
Yet, as of 2019, the fact of a scientific consensus is mentioned in a
mere 4% of Times articles about climate change, he and Retzinger found.
The fact that we are experiencing levels of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere that haven't been seen in millions of years - and never 
before in human history - is mentioned in only 1% of the paper's 
articles.
And the fact that climate change is permanent is mentioned in only 0.4% of articles.
"We are talking about an alteration of the planet's climate, and in 
all of my conversations with people, no one has ever asked me how long 
it lasts," Romps said. "I don't understand how people can have any sort 
of opinion about global warming without knowing that fact: that it is 
effectively permanent. The time scale for drawing the CO2 anomaly back 
down to where it was 50 years ago is on the order of 100,000 years, 10 
times longer than human civilization. So it is, for all intents and 
purposes, permanent. And each additional increment of warming is 
effectively permanent."
Lack of facts sows confusion
A fourth climate-change fact he looked at - that CO2 produced by 
fossil fuel burning creates a greenhouse effect that warms the planet -
was mentioned in only 0.1% of the articles. Many people confuse the 
effects of carbon dioxide with the ozone hole, which is caused by 
chlorofluorocarbons used in refrigerators, or think that warming is due 
to the heat produced by burning oil and gas.
His data show that, in the 1980s, when the concept of global warming
was still new to many readers, the Times often referred to the 
mechanism of greenhouse warming and did so, in some years, in every 
article. But 20 years later, this mechanism is seldom mentioned, despite
a whole new generation of readers.
The only fact mentioned regularly - in nearly one-third of all 
articles - is that the effects of climate change are being felt now. 
But of the 600 news articles mentioning climate change over the 38-year 
period, the vast majority contained none of the five basic climate 
facts. This occurred despite the ease with which the basic facts of 
climate science were embedded in articles that did mention these facts.
"We have this major problem: that people don't seem to have a solid 
grasp of the fundamental ideas. And why would that be?" he asked. "There
has been a well-funded campaign to spread misinformation and sow doubt 
about global warming, which has been very successful. On the other hand,
climate scientists are not necessarily out there communicating 
effectively to the public."
"After you finish school, you learn about science primarily through 
the news," he added. "And if you are not getting appropriate context 
from that news coverage, you are going to be confused."
Romps is embarking on an experiment to try to change this, 
partnering with UC Berkeley's Graduate School of Journalism to offer 
fellowships to student environmental writers to discuss with climate 
scientists the basic facts about climate change and how best to convey 
them within news articles. If this proves effective in changing public 
understanding, it could open the door to a broader national discussion 
of climate change coverage in the media.
Paper of record
To assess whether the basic facts behind the scientific consensus 
about climate change are being communicated through the media, Romps and
Retzinger focused on perhaps the number one paper of record in the 
nation, the Times.
"We chose The New York Times because it certainly has this 
reputation of being excellent in covering environmental issues and 
climate change, and I personally think it's one of the best," he said. 
"At the same time, I had this feeling from having read stories on 
climate that they didn't convey the basic facts to readers, and that 
that might be a problem."
They enlisted the help of a dozen undergraduate students to review 
New York Times articles mentioning climate change that were published 
between 1980 and 2018, in search of the key words employed when 
mentioning five basic facts: the consensus, mechanism, longevity, 
magnitude and immediacy of climate change.
They then searched for all articles that included these key words, 
and Romps read each one to judge whether or not it mentioned these five 
facts.
"I don't think that everyone learning the basic facts I have 
outlined here is a solution in itself. But I do believe it is a 
necessary condition," he said. "We are not going to make the progress we
need until everyone from both political parties, from rural and urban 
areas, from all states, accept the fact that global warming is 
happening, it is caused by us, and that the solution is to stop burning 
fossil fuels. These are the basic facts that climate scientists know, 
policy wonks know, but somehow the broader public does not quite 
appreciate yet."
In addition to his efforts to better communicate the facts of 
climate change, Romps hopes to set an example for those wanting to 
reduce their carbon footprint. Last year, he refused to fly to an awards
presentation, and since January has not flown to any scientific 
meetings - a big drop from his typical yearly air mileage topping 
100,000 miles. He'd like to deliver scientific papers to colleagues via 
video streaming, but this is not yet an accepted practice at annual 
meetings.
Nevertheless, he is heartened by younger people speaking out, and he  supported the Sept. 20 worldwide climate strike.
"Being a climate scientist can be a fairly depressing occupation," 
Romps said. "But seeing young people stand up and make their voices 
heard is really quite encouraging. There is hope. The youth have been 
heeding the call, and we need grown-ups to start heeding the call, too."
Environmental journalists and advocates have in recent weeks made a number of apocalyptic predictions about the impact of climate change. Bill McKibben suggested climate-driven fires in Australia had made koalas "functionally extinct." Extinction Rebellion said"Billions will die" and "Life on Earth is dying."Vice claimed the "collapse of civilization may have already begun."
Few have underscored the threat more than student climate activist Greta Thunberg and Green New Deal sponsor Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The latter said, "The world is going to end in 12 years if we don't address climate change."Says Thunberg in her new book, "Around 2030 we will be in a position to set off an irreversible chain reaction beyond human control that will lead to the end of our civilization as we know it."
Sometimes, scientists themselves make apocalyptic claims. "It's difficult to see how we could accommodate a billion people or even half of that," if Earth warms four degrees, said one earlier this year. "The potential for multi-breadbasket failure is increasing,"said another. If sea levels rise as much as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts, another scientist said, "It will be an unmanageable problem."
Apocalyptic statements like these have real-world impacts. In September, a group of British psychologists said children are increasingly suffering from anxiety from the frightening discourse around climate change. In October, an activist with Extinction Rebellion ("XR"), and a videographer, were kicked and beaten in a London Tube station by angry commuters. And last week, an XR co-founders aid a genocide like the Holocaust was "happening again, on a far greater scale, and in plain sight" from climate change.
Climate change is an issue I care passionately about and have dedicated a significant portion of my life to addressing. I have been politically active on the issue for over 20 years and have researched and written about it for 17 years. Over the last four years, my organization, Environmental Progress, has worked with some of the world's leading climate scientists to prevent carbon emissions from rising. So far, we've helped prevent emissions increasing the equivalent of adding 24 million cars to the road.
I also care about getting the facts and science right and have in recent months corrected inaccurate and apocalyptic news media coverage of fires in the Amazon and fires in California, both of which have been improperly presented as resulting primarily from climate change.
Journalists and activists alike have an obligation to describe environmental problems honestly and accurately, even if they fear doing so will reduce their news value or salience with the public. There is good evidence that the catastrophist framing of climate change is self-defeating because it alienates and polarizes many people. And exaggerating climate change risks distracting us from other important issues including ones we might have more near-term control over.
I feel the need to say this up-front because I want the issues I'm about to raise to be taken seriously and not dismissed by those who label as "climate deniers" or "climate delayers" anyone who pushes back against exaggeration.
With that out of the way, let's look whether the science supports what's being said.
First, no credible scientific body has ever said climate change threatens the collapse of civilization much less the extinction of the human species. "'Our children are going to die in the next 10 to 20 years.' What's the scientific basis for these claims?" BBC's Andrew Neil asked a visibly uncomfortable XR spokesperson last month.
"These claims have been disputed, admittedly," she said. "There are some scientists who are agreeing and some who are saying it's not true. But the overall issue is that these deaths are going to happen."
"But most scientists don't agree with this," said Neil. "I looked through IPCC reports and see no reference to billions of people going to die, or children in 20 years. How would they die?"
"Mass migration around the world already taking place due to prolonged drought in countries, particularly in South Asia. There are wildfires in Indonesia, the Amazon rainforest, Siberia, the Arctic," she said.
But in saying so, the XR spokesperson had grossly misrepresented the science."There is robust evidence of disasters displacing people worldwide,"notesIPCC, "but limited evidence that climate change or sea-level rise is the direct cause"
What about "mass migration"?"The majority of resultant population movements tend to occur within the borders of affected countries," says IPCC.
It's not like climate doesn't matter. It's that climate change is outweighed by other factors. Earlier this year, researchers found that climate "has affected organized armed conflict within countries. However, other drivers, such as low socioeconomic development and low capabilities of the state, are judged to be substantially more influential."
Last January, after climate scientists criticized Rep. Ocasio-Cortez for saying the world would end in 12 years, her spokes person said"We can quibble about the phraseology, whether it's existential or cataclysmic." He added, "We're seeing lots of [climate change-related] problems that are already impacting lives."
That last part may be true, but it's also true that economic development has made us less vulnerable, which is why there was a 99.7% decline in the death toll from natural disasters since its peak in 1931.
In 1931, 3.7 million people died from natural disasters. In 2018, just 11,000 did. And that decline occurred over a period when the global population quadrupled.
What about sea level rise? IPCC estimates sea level could rise two feet (0.6 meters) by 2100. Does that sound apocalyptic or even "unmanageable"?
Consider that one-third of the Netherlands is below sea level, and some areas are seven meters below sea level. You might object that Netherlands is rich while Bangladesh is poor. But the Netherlands adapted to living below sea level400 years ago.Technology has improved a bit since then.
What about claims of crop failure, famine, and mass death? That's science fiction, not science. Humans today produce enough food for 10 billion people, or 25% more than we need, and scientific bodies predict increases in that share, not declines.
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)forecasts crop yields increasing 30% by 2050. And the poorest parts of the world, like sub-Saharan Africa, are expected to see increases of 80 to 90%.
Nobody is suggesting climate change won't negatively impact crop yields. It could. But such declines should be put in perspective. Wheat yields increased 100 to 300% around the world since the 1960s, while a study of 30 models found that yields would decline by 6% for every one degree Celsius increase in temperature.
Rates of future yield growth depend far more on whether poor nations get access to tractors, irrigation, and fertilizer than on climate change, says FAO.
All of this helps explain why IPCC anticipates climate change will have a modest impact on economic growth. By 2100, IPCC projects the global economy will be 300 to 500% larger than it is today. Both IPCC and the Nobel-winning Yale economist, William Nordhaus, predict that warming of 2.5°C and 4°C would reduce gross domestic product (GDP) by 2% and 5% over that same period.
Does this mean we shouldn't worry about climate change? Not at all.
One of the reasons I work on climate change is because I worry about the impact it could have on endangered species. Climate change may threaten one million species globally and half of all mammals, reptiles, and amphibians in diverse places like the Albertine Rift in central Africa, home to the endangered mountain gorilla.
But it's not the case that "we're putting our own survival in danger" through extinctions, as Elizabeth Kolbert claimed in her book, Sixth Extinction. As tragic as animal extinctions are, they do not threaten human civilization. If we want to save endangered species, we need to do so because we care about wildlife for spiritual, ethical, or aesthetic reasons, not survival ones.
And exaggerating the risk, and suggesting climate change is more important than things like habitat destruction, are counterproductive.
For example, Australia's fires are not driving koalas extinct, as Bill McKibben suggested. The main scientific body that tracks the species, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, or IUCN, labels the koala "vulnerable," which is one level less threatened than "endangered," two levels less than "critically endangered," and three less than "extinct" in the wild.
Should we worry about koalas? Absolutely! They are amazing animals and their numbers have declined to around 300,000. But they face far bigger threats such as the destruction of habitat, disease, bushfires, and invasive species.
Think of it this way. The climate could change dramatically — and we could still save koalas. Conversely, the climate could change only modestly — and koalas could still go extinct.
The monomaniacal focus on climate distracts our attention from other threats to koalas and opportunities for protecting them, like protecting and expanding their habitat.
As for fire, one of Australia's leading scientists on the issue says, "Bushfire losses can be explained by the increasing exposure of dwellings to fire-prone bush lands. No other influences need be invoked. So even if climate change had played some small role in modulating recent bushfires, and we cannot rule this out, any such effects on risk to property are clearly swamped by the changes in exposure."
Nor are the fires solely due to drought, which is common in Australia, and exceptional this year. "Climate change is playing its role here,"saidRichard Thornton of the Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre in Australia, "but it's not the cause of these fires."
The same is true for fires in the United States. In 2017, scientists modeled 37 different regions and found"humans may not only influence fire regimes but their presence can actually override, or swamp out, the effects of climate." Of the 10 variables that influence fire, "none were as significant... as the anthropogenic variables," such as building homes near, and managing fires and wood fuel growth within, forests.
Climate scientists are starting to push back against exaggerations by activists, journalists, and other scientists.
"While many species are threatened with extinction,"saidStanford's Ken Caldeira, "climate change does not threaten human extinction... I would not like to see us motivating people to do the right thing by making them believe something that is false."
I asked the Australian climate scientist Tom Wigley what he thought of the claim that climate change threatens civilization. "It really does bother me because it's wrong," he said. "All these young people have been misinformed. And partly it's Greta Thunberg's fault. Not deliberately. But she's wrong."
But don't scientists and activists need to exaggerate in order to get the public's attention?
"I'm reminded of what [late Stanford University climate scientist] Steve Schneider used to say," Wigley replied. "He used to say that as a scientist, we shouldn't really be concerned about the way we slant things in communicating with people out on the street who might need a little push in a certain direction to realize that this is a serious problem. Steve didn't have any qualms about speaking in that biased way. I don't quite agree with that."
Wigley started working on climate science full-time in 1975 and created one of the first climate models (MAGICC) in 1987. It remains one of the main climate models in use today.
"When I talk to the general public," he said, "I point out some of the things that might make projections of warming less and the things that might make them more. I always try to present both sides."
Part of what bothers me about the apocalyptic rhetoric by climate activists is that it is often accompanied by demands that poor nations be denied the cheap sources of energy they need to develop.
"If you want to minimize carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in 2070 you might want to accelerate the burning of coal in India today," MIT climate scientist Kerry Emanuel said.
"It doesn't sound like it makes sense. Coal is terrible for carbon. But it's by burning a lot of coal that they make themselves wealthier, and by making themselves wealthier they have fewer children, and you don't have as many people burning carbon, you might be better off in 2070."
Emanuel and Wigley say the extreme rhetoric is making political agreement on climate change harder.
"You've got to come up with some kind of middle ground where you do reasonable things to mitigate the risk and try at the same time to lift people out of poverty and make them more resilient," said Emanuel. "We shouldn't be forced to choose between lifting people out of poverty and doing something for the climate."
Happily, there is a plenty of middle ground between climate apocalypse and climate denial.
I was in high school when the United Nation's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released its finalized "Fifth Assessment Report." For a week in 2014, the report occupied my computer screen, side by side with an unfinished college application essay.
IPCC reports are the most comprehensive accounts of how human activities influence the climate. In the seven  years since the IPCC released its fifth report, I completed a bachelor's degree, spent a year in the workforce, completed a master's degree and began a career in energy policy. Over the same time, humanity emitted about 220 billion tons of CO2, more than the total  to the end of World War II. So as the release of the IPCC's sixth assessment approached this year, I found myself dreading what it would reveal.
On Aug. 9, I found out. The latest report represented "a code red for humanity," . All my fears, confirmed.
But the horror I anticipated never arrived. I combed through page after page of catastrophic projections with the same level of alarm I'd have reading a recipe for peach cobbler. At the end of the document, I closed the tab and opened an article about the Tokyo Olympics. Ashamed as I am to admit it, I felt nothing.
At the age of 25, I am of a generation of people who have been aware - terrifyingly, paralyzingly aware - of climate change for our entire lives. From the moment I began to take an interest in world affairs, I have been cognizant of a terrible danger beyond the horizon, a near insurmountable challenge that could throw the world I knew into chaos. In sixth grade, a close friend confessed to me that he had been losing sleep worrying about climate change. I told him I had too.
For me, and I suspect for my friend, the climate crisis has never been about hope. In my quarter-century on Earth, no great challenge - be it terrorism, disease or economic catastrophe - has gone unmet by division, bigotry and greed; why should climate change be any different? With each passing year, I have seen the window of opportunity to act grow ever narrower, all the while becoming more confident in my hopelessness.
But neither has the climate crisis evoked the fatalism that often accompanies hopelessness. Not once in my lifetime has the apparent inevitability of climate catastrophe overwhelmed my motivation to act on it. In my head, I am forever on a sinking ship, faced with the choice of passively drowning or swimming doggedly for shore. And so I swim, understanding I will probably drown, but certain that doing something is better than doing nothing.
Many in my generation approach the climate crisis through this confusing cocktail of pessimism and determination. With no hope of avoiding catastrophe, we nevertheless campaign tirelessly for this impossibility. We have seen no evidence that society will solve this problem, yet we act each day as if it might.
This is why I felt nothing reading the latest IPCC report. It held within its pages a simple confirmation of what my generation had already observed: a detailed catalog of repeated, inexcusable failures to deal with an ever-apparent crisis.
The report belatedly acknowledges an off-ramp. There is still, it reminds us, the possibility of limiting global warming to 1.5˚C. Should humanity collectively commit to solving the problem, there remains a tiny chance of avoiding catastrophe.
Popular discourse parrots this approach. Politicians fighting for climate action obligatorily reframe the crisis as an opportunity. Reporters interviewing experts end each segment with the question, "What gives you hope?" (I am guilty of this). Through it all, we are told a singular message: The only way to overcome the challenge of climate change is to hold out hope that we will do so.
This message is simplistic at best, condescending at worst. Younger generations consistently report  and  over the impending climate crisis. These same generations are leading the global wave of activism and electoral support for climate action. Through it all we have proved capable of holding two conflicting ideas in mind at once. On the one hand, we acknowledge the near inevitability of catastrophic climate change. On the other, we understand we must fight against it because, after all, what other option do we have?
Beyond hope there is more than despair. There is determination, realism and action. There is a generation raised amid the ravages of a changing climate making every effort - a constant effort - to prevent the inevitable. The ship may sink, but we are going to swim like hell toward shore.
Daniel Propp is special assistant to the founding director at the Center on Global Energy Policy at Columbia University. 
This story originally appeared in . 
LOS ANGELES, CA - SEPTEMBER 20, 2019 - Chaya Forman,15, Venice High School student rallies in a climate change protest in Pershing Square, Los Angeles on Friday afternoon September 20, 2019 as part of the global climate walkout movement. The global climate strike protests have been inspired by Greta Thunberg, a 16-year-old Swedish activist who sailed across the Atlantic Ocean in a zero-emission yacht rather than fly and on Wednesday met with members of Congress, urging them to heed scientists' warnings on climate change.
My business, Bruzzi Vineyard, is based in Young. We also have a tasting room located in Superior. My regular commute between these two communities takes me through some of the most remote, wild, unspoiled lands in the state. This drive takes me across theSierra Ancha Mountains, through Tonto Basin, past Roosevelt Lake, and through the QueenCreek Canyon. This is one of the most spectacularly beautiful and relatively untouched parts of the lower 48, a stunning transition zone connecting the Sonoran Desert with the Mogollon Rim.
Every day I notice something new - a black bear scampering across the road, an unnoticed rock formation hit in just the right light, skies of every color.While studying this landscape, wild as it is, environmental degradation is apparent. Tailings from abandoned asbestos mines litter pristine mountainsides. Tailings from current mines pick up and blow in the wind. Smoke from wildfires obscures the vistas for months every year. Burn scars stretch across an alarming percentage of the terrain. Invasive and non native flora fill the open spaces. Large numbers of trees in the forest are dead from extended drought. The creeks and springs that fill Roosevelt Lake run less and less. Make no mistake, these lands are rugged but they are not resilient.
Growing award winning wine grapes in the mountains of Arizona has an inherent series of challenges but we have seen weather related challenges increase over the last several years.Despite utilizing low water irrigation at our vineyard, drought has placed a strain on local wildlife, requiring a new fence to be built around our property to keep out hungry elk. Winters have less snow, frost comes later in the spring and earlier in the fall, and damaging hail is a regular occurrence during monsoon storms. When it does rain it is often either too little or too much too fast to have true benefit.
These trends continue year after year. Currently, around 10% of the Tonto National Forest is burned every year. These fires destroy iconic landscapes, historical resources and local tourism.The floods and burn scars continue after the fires for years, decades or longer. This year theTelegraph Fire came within miles of incinerating our tasting room in downtown Superior and threatened the entire town of Superior as well as Miami, Globe and many smaller communities.
Every year we live in fear of fire at our Young location. Government action to prevent these fires on public land and to follow up and restore after these fires is completely insufficient. Climate change is not a theoretical debate where we live because it affects our lives every day. Our rural communities are all close neighbors with the NationalForests that surround us and we need action from our government representatives to address climate change and its many tragic effects. Our tourism and agriculture industries, a vital part of our local economies, culture and heritage, depend on it.
A local group is planning a protest tomorrow in opposition to the United Nation's Climate Change Conference in Cancun.
The group, Americans for Prosperity-Colorado, will be meeting at the Retired Enlisted Associated at 834 Emory Circle in the Springs at 6 p.m. to protest "alarmism" about global warming, and its cost to taxpayers.
Called the Hot Air Tour, the group is also planning protests in Grand Junction and Loveland.
"Coloradoans are fed up with the Washington bureaucrats that are trying to run our lives with their plan to regulate carbon emissions," said AFP Colorado State Director Jeff Crank. "Many Coloradoans are hurting economically and can't afford to pay higher prices for food and gas while bureaucrats fly around the world to dictate their agenda. "
The group will broadcast a Webcast featuring AFP President Tim Phillips.
BOISE - The University of Idaho may be the center of climate change research in Idaho, but don't count Moscow Sen. Dan Foreman among the true believers.
      
Foreman, who represents Latah and Benewah counties, said human-caused climate change is a "scam" perpetrated by left-wing fanatics looking for an excuse to raise taxes and grow government.
      
Responding to a recent email regarding a House panel's decision to eliminate any mention of climate change in school science standards, the freshman lawmaker said the theory of global warming is "nonsense."
      
"Global warming ranks right up there with Al Gore's phony ozone scare," he wrote. "I hope the Legislature enacts legislation to eliminate this ridiculous nonsense from all our textbooks. The left wing has created a new religion, and it's called 'the environment.' I wish they'd pay more attention to real religion. Maybe we could make real progress in this country. People need to wake up and rediscover critical thinking once again. Too many people are falling victim to these scams foisted on us by liberal zealots with ulterior motives."
      
There is widespread consensus in the scientific and academic communities for the idea that human industrial activity and fossil fuel consumption is responsible for climate warming trends over the past century. Among other organizations, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Geophysical Union, American Meteorological Society, National Academies of Science and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have all issued statements supporting that conclusion.
      
Nevertheless, during a follow-up interview Foreman said the concern about human-caused climate change is a liberal effort "to push for bigger government and higher taxes in the name of the almighty environment."
      
"There's no substance to (the theory)," he said. "I know credible scientists in the former Soviet Union who have concluded the Earth is actually cooling."
      
Foreman said he fully supports teaching kids as much math, engineering and science as possible, "but let's not run around like Chicken Little teaching something that's proven to be anything but credible."
      
During the election campaign last summer, Foreman made a point of knocking on doors in Moscow to discuss his political views with voters, letting them know he was "a Christian, a conservative and a Republican, in that order."
      
His email messages may sound somewhat abrupt, but in person he comes across as very direct and sincere.
      
"I literally get thousands of emails each week," Foreman said. "I try to answer them all, so I have to be short. I feel obligated to answer them honestly. I'm short and to the point, but I'm always courteous and always say 'Thank you.' I say, 'Here's the way I see things; I understand you may see them differently, but I'm doing you the courtesy of telling you exactly what I think.'"
      
As an aside, he also noted that he wasn't following the standard advice given to new lawmakers to keep their mouths shut and ears open.
      
"That got boring real quick."
An international celebrity in the world of climate-change skepticism, Lord Christopher Monckton paid a visit the Flathead Valley Tuesday night as part of a speaking tour in Montana.
The presentation, held at the Outlaw Convention Center in Kalispell and sponsored by Northwest Liberty News and Concerned Citizens of Northwest Montana, drew about 150 attendees. During his hour-long talk, the British mathematician denounced the measures urged by climate scientists and world leaders as part of a conspiracy designed to subject citizens of countries around the world to a system of global governance and control.
Monckton has gained renown in conservative circles after working alongside former U.K. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, with whom he co-founded the Centre for Policy Studies in 1974. Since then, the House of Lords member has emerged as a leading skeptic of climate change and a proponent of Great Britain's exit from the European Union.
One of his main targets is the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a United Nations-backed organization of scientists that publishes annual reports on the impacts and future predictions of climate change.
He accused the organization of using language "designed to confuse, obfuscate and obscure -- and what I'm going to do is try to blow some of the fog away."
Monckton recognizes the "greenhouse effect" of heat-trapping gases in the environment, as well as a warming trend occurring throughout the planet, but attributes the latter to natural processes instead of man-made emissions.
In explaining a theory he has recently developed, Monckton ran through a series of equations that he said demonstrate a fundamental error that has resulted in climate models miscalculating carbon dioxide's effect on atmospheric temperature.
"The bottom line of what all this complicated mathematics means is there is not going to be [significant climate change] for at least a few thousand years," he told the audience.
Earlier in the day Monckton had toured Glacier National Park, and responded to a question from an audience member by stating that the park's glaciers -- often cited as one of the most visible signs of a changing climate -- have been disappearing since 1850, while human influence on the global environment would not have begun until 1950.
Scientific literature examining the park's glaciers have shown that their retreat began at the end of the "Little Ice Age," a global cooling period that ended in the mid-19th century. However, scientists studying the ongoing changes in the park's glacial ice say that the glaciers began retreating more rapidly alongside increasing annual average temperatures recorded in the park during the 20th century.
A classical architect by training, Monckton studied mathematics and focuses his research on climate change and economics.
Monckton is also the chief policy adviser to the Science and Public Policy Institute and is a board member of the International Climate Science Coalition, both of which are organizations dedicated to criticizing mainstream climate science.
Earth Day is April 22. Recently, some scientists have started calling climate change the “climate change emergency” or the “climate change crisis” because of the disastrous effects climate change could have. Also, in 2020, there were worldwide demonstrations by students who wanted more done to address climate change
An excuse that some politicians have given for not doing more to address climate change is that it would cost jobs. Switching to renewable energy will cost jobs in the fossil fuel industry but create clean energy jobs. Another excuse is that switching to clean energy could make energy more expensive for low-income people. I’m affiliated with the Citizens Climate Lobby which advocates a fee on carbon emissions and a monthly dividend to return the fees collected to the American People. Low-income people have a low carbon foot so their dividend would exceed their extra cost of energy.
A National Geographic magazine article about young people taking the lead in fighting climate change quotes a student as saying, “It is incredible that kindergartners can grasp this as a problem and politicians can’t”.
It’s time for all politicians to listen to what scientists and young people are saying and take immediate and decisive action to address climate change.
A recent climate change report from the federal government is stark and unflinching. To summarize, it says the U.S. economy could lose hundreds of billions of dollars annually by the end of the century; that climate-influenced pollution and disease will result; and that natural resource industries must adapt or face extinction.
This follows a United Nations report issued last month that declared humans have until 2030 to significantly reduce carbon emissions or deal with an irreversible climate calamity.
Contrary to shameful assertions by climate change deniers, the latest report is not the result of a handful of agenda-driven advocates. The U.S. Global Change Research Program involves 13 federal agencies. The report, the "Fourth National Climate Assessment, Vol. II," was compiled by more than 1,000 people, including 300 scientists - about half of them from outside government.
The first volume, released a year ago, concluded that there is "no convincing alternative explanation" for the changing climate other than "human activities, especially emissions of greenhouse gases." Greenhouse gases from the burning of fossil fuels help trap heat in the atmosphere, and concern about the impact is nothing new; the theory of the "greenhouse effect" dates to the 1800s, and it has been a policy issue in the United States since the 1970s.
Now, David Easterling of the National Centers for Environmental Information says, "The global average temperature is much higher and is rising more rapidly than anything modern civilization has experienced, and this warming trend can only be explained by human activities."
The latest U.S. government report is long on details and short on light reading. Notably, it contains a specific chapter detailing the impact of climate change for each region of the country, including the Northwest, and it stresses that our bucolic slice of the world is facing dire impacts:
n "Warming and related changes in climate are already affecting aspects of the Northwest's identity such as its natural resource economy   The built systems that support Northwest residents and the health of residents themselves are also already experiencing the effects of climate change."
n "Specialty crops, including apples and other tree fruits, are already experiencing changes. Higher spring temperatures have led to earlier flowering, which can lead to a mismatch with the availability of pollinators required for fruit setting (the process of flowers becoming fruit) and can affect fruit quality as well as yield."
n "Forests in the interior Northwest are changing rapidly because of increasing wildfire and insect and disease damage, attributed largely to a changing climate. These changes are expected to increase as temperatures increase."
n "Children and youth, in general, will likely experience cumulative physical and mental health effects of climate change over their lifetimes due to increased exposure to extreme weather events."
Those are merely snippets from a 13,000-word chapter detailing the role climate change is playing in the Northwest. In short, a changing climate will alter the world we leave for our children and grandchildren - an assertion echoed by a vast majority of people who study the climate for a living.
The question then becomes: What can we do about it? In Tuesday's paper, we will editorially take a look at how the Northwest should prepare for this changing environment.